PAGE: 23
CHAPTER 1
Introduction: The Nature of Science and
Physics
FIGURE1.1The laws of physics describe the smallest and largest forces and structures, such as the Veil Nebula, a supernova remnant from
a star that was 20 times larger than our Sun. Stretching over 110 light years across, the spectacular image is created by the stellar
explosion's blast wave impacting clouds of gas. Scientists use successive observations of the still-moving wave to learn about nebula
formation in ways they can apply to other systems. The laws of physics are surprisingly few in number, implying an underlying simplicity to
nature’s apparent complexity. (credit: NASA, ESA, Hubble Heritage, and the Digitized Sky Survey 2)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
1.1Physics: An Introduction
1.2Physical Quantities and Units
1.3Accuracy, Precision, and Significant Figures
1.4Approximation
INTRODUCTION TO SCIENCE AND THE REALM OF PHYSICS, PHYSICAL QUANTITIES, AND UNITS What is your
first reaction when you hear the word “physics”? Did you imagine working through difficult equations or memorizing
formulas that seem to have no real use in life outside the physics classroom? Many people come to the subject of
physics with a bit of fear. But as you begin your exploration of this broad-ranging subject, you may soon come to
realize that physics plays a much larger role in your life than you first thought, no matter your life goals or career
choice.
Consider the Veil Nebula, a cloud of heated dust and gas located about 2,400 light years from Earth (a light year is
the distance light travels in one year, or approximately 9.5 trillion kilometers). The unique structure is the ongoing
result of a supernova that occurred 8,000 years ago. The shock wave from the explosion is colliding with a cloud of
gas and dust, creating the rope-like filaments and sheet-like appearance. Scientists compare newer images, such as
the one above, with detailed images taken by the Hubble Space Telescope in 1997 in order to understand nebula
expansion and other properties of astronomical objects. The forces that cause the supernova remnant to act as it
PAGE: 24
6 1 • Introduction: The Nature of Science and Physics
does are the same forces we contend with here on Earth, whether we are planning to send a rocket into space or
simply heating a new home. Although the scale is much different, the interaction of gasses in the Veil Nebula
resembles those on Earth; and the vibrant color combinations are created by the familiar glows of hydrogen, sulfur,
oxygen, and similar elements that make up everything we know. Tonight, take a moment to look up at the stars. The
forces out there are the same as the ones here on Earth. Through a study of physics, you may gain a greater
understanding of the interconnectedness of everything we can see and know in this universe.
Humans have created and manufactured millions of different objects over the history of our species. Successive
technological periods (often referred to as the Stone Age, the Bronze Age, the Iron Age, and so on) were marked by
our knowledge of the physical properties of certain materials and our ability to manipulate them. This knowledge all
stems from physics, whether it's the way a rock would flake when constructing a spear point, the effect of
integrating carbon with iron in South Indian and Sri Lankan furnaces to create the earliest high-quality steel, or the
proper way to combine perfectly ground and polished pieces of glass to create optical instruments. Our current
technological age, the Information Age, builds on all that knowledge and can be traced to critical innovations made
by people from all backgrounds working together. Mohamed M. Atalla and Dawon Kahng, for example, invented the
MOSFET (metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistor). Although unknown to most people, this tiny device,
created in 1959 by an Egyptian-born scientist and Korean-born scientist working in a lab in New Jersey, is the basis
for modern electronics. More MOSFETs have been produced than any other object in human history. They are used
in computers, smart phones, microwave ovens, automotive controls, medical instruments, and nearly every other
electronic device.
Next, think about the most exciting modern technologies that you have heard about in the news, such as trains that
levitate above tracks, “invisibility cloaks” that bend light around them, and microscopic robots that fight cancer cells
in our bodies. All of these groundbreaking advancements, commonplace or unbelievable, rely on the principles of
physics. Aside from playing a significant role in technology, professionals such as engineers, pilots, physicians,
physical therapists, electricians, and computer programmers apply physics concepts in their daily work. For
example, a pilot must understand how wind forces affect a flight path and a physical therapist must understand how
the muscles in the body experience forces as they move and bend. As you will learn in this text, physics principles
are propelling new, exciting technologies, and these principles are applied in a wide range of careers.
In this text, you will begin to explore the history of the formal study of physics, beginning with natural philosophy
and the ancient thinkers from the Middle East and the Mediterranean, and leading up through a review of Sir Isaac
Newton and the laws of physics that bear his name. You will also be introduced to the standards scientists use when
they study physical quantities and the interrelated system of measurements most of the scientific community uses
to communicate in a single mathematical language. Finally, you will study the limits of our ability to be accurate and
precise, and the reasons scientists go to painstaking lengths to be as clear as possible regarding their own
limitations.
1.1 Physics: An Introduction
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the difference between a principle and a law.
• Explain the difference between a model and a theory.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 25
1.1 • Physics: An Introduction 7
FIGURE1.2The flight formations of migratory birds such as Canada geese are governed by the laws of physics. (credit: David Merrett)
The physical universe is enormously complex in its detail. Every day, each of us observes a great variety of objects
and phenomena. Over the centuries, the curiosity of the human race has led us collectively to explore and catalog a
tremendous wealth of information. From the flight of birds to the colors of flowers, from lightning to gravity, from
quarks to clusters of galaxies, from the flow of time to the mystery of the creation of the universe, we have asked
questions and assembled huge arrays of facts. In the face of all these details, we have discovered that a surprisingly
small and unified set of physical laws can explain what we observe. As humans, we make generalizations and seek
order. We have found that nature is remarkably cooperative—it exhibits theunderlying order and simplicitywe so
value.
It is the underlying order of nature that makes science in general, and physics in particular, so enjoyable to study.
For example, what do a bag of chips and a car battery have in common? Both contain energy that can be converted
to other forms. The law of conservation of energy (which says that energy can change form but is never lost) ties
together such topics as food calories, batteries, heat, light, and watch springs. Understanding this law makes it
easier to learn about the various forms energy takes and how they relate to one another. Apparently unrelated topics
are connected through broadly applicable physical laws, permitting an understanding beyond just the memorization
of lists of facts.
The unifying aspect of physical laws and the basic simplicity of nature form the underlying themes of this text. In
learning to apply these laws, you will, of course, study the most important topics in physics. More importantly, you
will gain analytical abilities that will enable you to apply these laws far beyond the scope of what can be included in
a single book. These analytical skills will help you to excel academically, and they will also help you to think critically
in any professional career you choose to pursue. This module discusses the realm of physics (to define what physics
is), some applications of physics (to illustrate its relevance to other disciplines), and more precisely what constitutes
a physical law (to illuminate the importance of experimentation to theory).
Science and the Realm of Physics
Science consists of the theories and laws that are the general truths of nature as well as the body of knowledge they
encompass. Scientists are continually trying to expand this body of knowledge and to perfect the expression of the
laws that describe it.Physicsis concerned with describing the interactions of energy, matter, space, and time, and it
is especially interested in what fundamental mechanisms underlie every phenomenon. The concern for describing
the basic phenomena in nature essentially defines therealm of physics.
Physics aims to describe the function of everything around us, from the movement of tiny charged particles to the
motion of people, cars, and spaceships. In fact, almost everything around you can be described quite accurately by
the laws of physics. Consider a smart phone (Figure 1.3). Physics describes how electricity interacts with the various
circuits inside the device. This knowledge helps engineers select the appropriate materials and circuit layout when
building the smart phone. Next, consider a GPS system. Physics describes the relationship between the speed of an
object, the distance over which it travels, and the time it takes to travel that distance. GPS relies on precise
calculations that account for variations in the Earth's landscapes, the exact distance between orbiting satellites, and
even the effect of a complex occurrence of time dilation. Most of these calculations are founded on algorithms
developed by Gladys West, a mathematician and computer scientist who programmed the first computers capable
of highly accurate remote sensing and positioning. When you use a GPS device, it utilizes these algorithms to
PAGE: 26
8 1 • Introduction: The Nature of Science and Physics
recognize where you are and how your position relates to other objects on Earth.
FIGURE1.3The Apple iPhone is a common smart phone with a GPS function, sophisticated camera, haptic (vibration) capabilities, and
many other functions. Physics describes the way that electricity flows through the circuits of this device. Engineers use their knowledge of
physics to construct an iPhone with features that consumers will enjoy. One specific feature of an iPhone is the GPS function. GPS uses
physics equations to determine the driving time between two locations on a map. (credit: Tinh tế Photo/Flickr)
Applications of Physics
You need not be a scientist to use physics. On the contrary, knowledge of physics is useful in everyday situations as
well as in nonscientific professions. It can help you understand how microwave ovens work, why metals should not
be put into them, and why they might affect pacemakers. (SeeFigure 1.4andFigure 1.5.) Physics allows you to
understand the hazards of radiation and rationally evaluate these hazards more easily. Physics also explains the
reason why a black car radiator helps remove heat in a car engine, and it explains why a white roof helps keep the
inside of a house cool. Similarly, the operation of a car’s ignition system as well as the transmission of electrical
signals through our body’s nervous system are much easier to understand when you think about them in terms of
basic physics.
Physics is the foundation of many important disciplines and contributes directly to others. Chemistry, for
example—since it deals with the interactions of atoms and molecules—is rooted in atomic and molecular physics.
Most branches of engineering are applied physics. In architecture, physics is at the heart of structural stability, and
is involved in the acoustics, heating, lighting, and cooling of buildings. Parts of geology rely heavily on physics, such
as radioactive dating of rocks, earthquake analysis, and heat transfer in the Earth. Some disciplines, such as
biophysics and geophysics, are hybrids of physics and other disciplines.
Physics has many applications in the biological sciences. On the microscopic level, it helps describe the properties
of cell walls and cell membranes (Figure 1.6andFigure 1.7). On the macroscopic level, it can explain the heat, work,
and power associated with the human body. Physics is involved in medical diagnostics, such as x-rays, magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI), and ultrasonic blood flow measurements. Medical therapy sometimes directly involves
physics; for example, cancer radiotherapy uses ionizing radiation. Physics can also explain sensory phenomena,
such as how musical instruments make sound, how the eye detects color, and how lasers can transmit information.
It is not necessary to formally study all applications of physics. What is most useful is knowledge of the basic laws of
physics and a skill in the analytical methods for applying them. The study of physics also can improve your problem-
solving skills. Furthermore, physics has retained the most basic aspects of science, so it is used by all of the
sciences, and the study of physics makes other sciences easier to understand.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 27
1.1 • Physics: An Introduction 9
FIGURE1.4The laws of physics help us understand how common appliances work. For example, the laws of physics can help explain how
microwave ovens heat up food, and they also help us understand why it is dangerous to place metal objects in a microwave oven. (credit:
MoneyBlogNewz)
FIGURE1.5These two applications of physics have more in common than meets the eye. Microwave ovens use electromagnetic waves to
heat food. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) also uses electromagnetic waves to yield an image of the brain, from which the exact location
of tumors can be determined. (credit: Rashmi Chawla, Daniel Smith, and Paul E. Marik)
FIGURE1.6Physics, chemistry, and biology help describe the properties of cell walls in plant cells, such as the onion cells seen here.
(credit: Umberto Salvagnin)
PAGE: 28
10 1 • Introduction: The Nature of Science and Physics
FIGURE1.7An artist’s rendition of the structure of a cell membrane. Membranes form the boundaries of animal cells and are complex in
structure and function. Many of the most fundamental properties of life, such as the firing of nerve cells, are related to membranes. The
disciplines of biology, chemistry, and physics all help us understand the membranes of animal cells. (credit: Mariana Ruiz)
Models, Theories, and Laws; The Role of Experimentation
The laws of nature are concise descriptions of the universe around us; they are human statements of the underlying
laws or rules that all natural processes follow. Such laws are intrinsic to the universe; humans did not create them
and so cannot change them. We can only discover and understand them. Their discovery is a very human endeavor,
with all the elements of mystery, imagination, struggle, triumph, and disappointment inherent in any creative effort.
(SeeFigure 1.8andFigure 1.9.) The cornerstone of discovering natural laws is observation; science must describe
the universe as it is, not as we may imagine it to be.
FIGURE1.8Isaac Newton(1642–1727) was very reluctant to publish his revolutionary work and had to be convinced to do so. In his later
years, he stepped down from his academic post and became exchequer of the Royal Mint. He took this post seriously, inventing reeding (or
creating ridges) on the edge of coins to prevent unscrupulous people from trimming the silver off of them before using them as currency.
(credit: Arthur Shuster and Arthur E. Shipley:Britain’s Heritage of Science. London, 1917.)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 29
1.1 • Physics: An Introduction 11
FIGURE1.9Marie Curie(1867–1934) sacrificed monetary assets to help finance her early research and damaged her physical well-being
with radiation exposure. She is the only person to win Nobel prizes in both physics and chemistry. One of her daughters also won a Nobel
Prize. (credit: Wikimedia Commons)
We all are curious to some extent. We look around, make generalizations, and try to understand what we see—for
example, we look up and wonder whether one type of cloud signals an oncoming storm. As we become serious
about exploring nature, we become more organized and formal in collecting and analyzing data. We attempt greater
precision, perform controlled experiments (if we can), and write down ideas about how the data may be organized
and unified. We then formulate models, theories, and laws based on the data we have collected and analyzed to
generalize and communicate the results of these experiments.
Amodelis a representation of something that is often too difficult (or impossible) to display directly. While a model
is justified with experimental proof, it is only accurate under limited situations. An example is the planetary model of
the atom in which electrons are pictured as orbiting the nucleus, analogous to the way planets orbit the Sun. (See
Figure 1.10.) We cannot observe electron orbits directly, but the mental image helps explain the observations we
can make, such as the emission of light from hot gases (atomic spectra). Physicists use models for a variety of
purposes. For example, models can help physicists analyze a scenario and perform a calculation, or they can be
used to represent a situation in the form of a computer simulation. Atheoryis an explanation for patterns in nature
that is supported by scientific evidence and verified multiple times by various groups of researchers. Some theories
include models to help visualize phenomena, whereas others do not. Newton’s theory of gravity, for example, does
not require a model or mental image, because we can observe the objects directly with our own senses. The kinetic
theory of gases, on the other hand, is a model in which a gas is viewed as being composed of atoms and molecules.
Atoms and molecules are too small to be observed directly with our senses—thus, we picture them mentally to
understand what our instruments tell us about the behavior of gases.
Alawuses concise language to describe a generalized pattern in nature that is supported by scientific evidence and
repeated experiments. Often, a law can be expressed in the form of a single mathematical equation. Laws and
theories are similar in that they are both scientific statements that result from a tested hypothesis and are
supported by scientific evidence. However, the designationlawis reserved for a concise and very general statement
that describes phenomena in nature, such as the law that energy is conserved during any process, or Newton’s
second law of motion, which relates force, mass, and acceleration by the simple equation . A theory, in
contrast, is a less concise statement of observed phenomena. For example, the Theory of Evolution and the Theory
of Relativity cannot be expressed concisely enough to be considered a law. The biggest difference between a law
and a theory is that a theory is much more complex and dynamic. A law describes a single action, whereas a theory
explains an entire group of related phenomena. And, whereas a law is a postulate that forms the foundation of the
scientific method, a theory is the end result of that process.
Less broadly applicable statements are usually called principles (such as Pascal’s principle, which is applicable only
in fluids), but the distinction between laws and principles often is not carefully made.
PAGE: 30
12 1 • Introduction: The Nature of Science and Physics
FIGURE1.10What is a model? This planetary model of the atom shows electrons orbiting the nucleus. It is a drawing that we use to form a
mental image of the atom that we cannot see directly with our eyes because it is too small.
Models, Theories, and Laws
Models, theories, and laws are used to help scientists analyze the data they have already collected. However,
often after a model, theory, or law has been developed, it points scientists toward new discoveries they would
not otherwise have made.
The models, theories, and laws we devise sometimesimply the existence of objects or phenomena as yet
unobserved.These predictions are remarkable triumphs and tributes to the power of science. It is the underlying
order in the universe that enables scientists to make such spectacular predictions. However, ifexperimentdoes not
verify our predictions, then the theory or law is wrong, no matter how elegant or convenient it is. Laws can never be
known with absolute certainty because it is impossible to perform every imaginable experiment in order to confirm a
law in every possible scenario. Physicists operate under the assumption that all scientific laws and theories are valid
until a counterexample is observed. If a good-quality, verifiable experiment contradicts a well-established law, then
the law must be modified or overthrown completely.
The study of science in general and physics in particular is an adventure much like the exploration of uncharted
ocean. Discoveries are made; models, theories, and laws are formulated; and the beauty of the physical universe is
made more sublime for the insights gained.
The Scientific Method
Ibn al-Haytham (sometimes referred to as Alhazen), a 10th-11th century scientist working in Cairo, significantly
advanced the understanding of optics and vision. But his contributions go much further. In demonstrating that
previous approaches were incorrect, he emphasized that scientists must be ready to reject existing knowledge
and become "the enemy" of everything they read; he expressed that scientists must trust only objective
evidence. Al-Haytham emphasized repeated experimentation and validation, and acknowledged that senses and
predisposition could lead to poor conclusions. His work was a precursor to the scientific method that we use
today.
As scientists inquire and gather information about the world, they follow a process called thescientific method.
This process typically begins with an observation and question that the scientist will research. Next, the scientist
typically performs some research about the topic and then devises a hypothesis. Then, the scientist will test the
hypothesis by performing an experiment. Finally, the scientist analyzes the results of the experiment and draws
a conclusion. Note that the scientific method can be applied to many situations that are not limited to science,
and this method can be modified to suit the situation.
Consider an example. Let us say that you try to turn on your car, but it will not start. You undoubtedly wonder:
Why will the car not start? You can follow a scientific method to answer this question. First off, you may perform
some research to determine a variety of reasons why the car will not start. Next, you will state a hypothesis. For
example, you may believe that the car is not starting because it has no engine oil. To test this, you open the hood
of the car and examine the oil level. You observe that the oil is at an acceptable level, and you thus conclude that
the oil level is not contributing to your car issue. To troubleshoot the issue further, you may devise a new
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 31
1.1 • Physics: An Introduction 13
hypothesis to test and then repeat the process again.
The Evolution of Natural Philosophy into Modern Physics
Physics was not always a separate and distinct discipline. It remains connected to other sciences to this day. The
wordphysicscomes from Greek, meaning nature. The study of nature came to be called “natural philosophy.” From
ancient times through the Renaissance, natural philosophy encompassed many fields, including astronomy, biology,
chemistry, physics, mathematics, and medicine. Over the last few centuries, the growth of knowledge has resulted
in ever-increasing specialization and branching of natural philosophy into separate fields, with physics retaining the
most basic facets. (SeeFigure 1.11,Figure 1.12, andFigure 1.13.) Physics as it developed from the Renaissance to
the end of the 19th century is calledclassical physics. It was transformed into modern physics by revolutionary
discoveries made starting at the beginning of the 20th century.
FIGURE1.11Over the centuries, natural philosophy has evolved into more specialized disciplines, as illustrated by the contributions of
some of the greatest minds in history. The Greek philosopherAristotle(384–322 B.C.) wrote on a broad range of topics including physics,
animals, the soul, politics, and poetry. (credit: Jastrow (2006)/Ludovisi Collection)
FIGURE1.12Ibn al-Haytham (965–1040) and Galileo Galilei (1564–1642) were so critical to the advancement of scientific practice and to
the fields of mathematics, optics, physics, and astronomy that a later prominent scientist featured them on the cover of his major work.
(credit: Johannes Hevelius (author), Adolph Boÿ (artist), J. Falck (engraver); Houghton Library, Harvard University/Wikimedia Commons)
PAGE: 32
14 1 • Introduction: The Nature of Science and Physics
FIGURE1.13Niels Bohr(1885–1962) made fundamental contributions to the development of quantum mechanics, one part of modern
physics. (credit: United States Library of Congress Prints and Photographs Division)
Classical physics is not an exact description of the universe, but it is an excellent approximation under the following
conditions: Matter must be moving at speeds less than about 1% of the speed of light, the objects dealt with must
be large enough to be seen with a microscope, and only weak gravitational fields, such as the field generated by the
Earth, can be involved. Because humans live under such circumstances, classical physics seems intuitively
reasonable, while many aspects of modern physics seem bizarre. This is why models are so useful in modern
physics—they let us conceptualize phenomena we do not ordinarily experience. We can relate to models in human
terms and visualize what happens when objects move at high speeds or imagine what objects too small to observe
with our senses might be like. For example, we can understand an atom’s properties because we can picture it in our
minds, although we have never seen an atom with our eyes. New tools, of course, allow us to better picture
phenomena we cannot see. In fact, new instrumentation has allowed us in recent years to actually “picture” the
atom.
Limits on the Laws of Classical Physics
For the laws of classical physics to apply, the following criteria must be met: Matter must be moving at speeds
less than about 1% of the speed of light, the objects dealt with must be large enough to be seen with a
microscope, and only weak gravitational fields (such as the field generated by the Earth) can be involved.
FIGURE1.14Using a scanning tunneling microscope (STM), scientists can see the individual atoms that compose this sheet of gold. (credit:
Erwinrossen)
Some of the most spectacular advances in science have been made in modern physics. Many of the laws of classical
physics have been modified or rejected, and revolutionary changes in technology, society, and our view of the
universe have resulted. Like science fiction, modern physics is filled with fascinating objects beyond our normal
experiences, but it has the advantage over science fiction of being very real. Why, then, is the majority of this text
devoted to topics of classical physics? There are two main reasons: Classical physics gives an extremely accurate
description of the universe under a wide range of everyday circumstances, and knowledge of classical physics is
necessary to understand modern physics.
Modern physicsitself consists of the two revolutionary theories, relativity and quantum mechanics. These theories
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 33
1.2 • Physical Quantities and Units 15
deal with the very fast and the very small, respectively.Relativitymust be used whenever an object is traveling at
greater than about 1% of the speed of light or experiences a strong gravitational field such as that near the Sun.
Quantum mechanicsmust be used for objects smaller than can be seen with a microscope. The combination of
these two theories isrelativistic quantum mechanics,and it describes the behavior of small objects traveling at high
speeds or experiencing a strong gravitational field. Relativistic quantum mechanics is the best universally applicable
theory we have. Because of its mathematical complexity, it is used only when necessary, and the other theories are
used whenever they will produce sufficiently accurate results. We will find, however, that we can do a great deal of
modern physics with the algebra and trigonometry used in this text.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
A friend tells you they have learned about a new law of nature. What can you know about the information even
before your friend describes the law? How would the information be different if your friend told you they had learned
about a scientific theory rather than a law?
Solution
Without knowing the details of the law, you can still infer that the information your friend has learned conforms to
the requirements of all laws of nature: it will be a concise description of the universe around us; a statement of the
underlying rules that all natural processes follow. If the information had been a theory, you would be able to infer
that the information will be a large-scale, broadly applicable generalization.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Equation Grapher
Learn about graphing polynomials. The shape of the curve changes as the constants are adjusted. View the curves
for the individual terms (e.g. ) to see how they add to generate the polynomial curve.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/1-1-physics-an-introduction)
1.2 Physical Quantities and Units
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Perform unit conversions both in the SI and English units.
• Explain the most common prefixes in the SI units and be able to write them in scientific notation.
FIGURE1.15The distance from Earth to the Moon may seem immense, but it is just a tiny fraction of the distances from Earth to other
celestial bodies. (credit: NASA)
The range of objects and phenomena studied in physics is immense. From the incredibly short lifetime of a nucleus
to the age of the Earth, from the tiny sizes of sub-nuclear particles to the vast distance to the edges of the known
universe, from the force exerted by a jumping flea to the force between Earth and the Sun, there are enough factors
of 10 to challenge the imagination of even the most experienced scientist. Giving numerical values for physical
quantities and equations for physical principles allows us to understand nature much more deeply than does
qualitative description alone. To comprehend these vast ranges, we must also have accepted units in which to
PAGE: 34
16 1 • Introduction: The Nature of Science and Physics
express them. And we shall find that (even in the potentially mundane discussion of meters, kilograms, and
seconds) a profound simplicity of nature appears—most physical quantities can be expressed as combinations of
only four fundamental physical quantities: length, mass, time, and electric current.
We define aphysical quantityeither byspecifying how it is measuredor bystating how it is calculatedfrom other
measurements. For example, we define distance and time by specifying methods for measuring them, whereas we
defineaverage speedby stating that it is calculated as distance traveled divided by time of travel.
Measurements of physical quantities are expressed in terms ofunits, which are standardized values. For example,
the length of a race, which is a physical quantity, can be expressed in units of meters (for sprinters) or kilometers
(for distance runners). Without standardized units, it would be extremely difficult for scientists to express and
compare measured values in a meaningful way. (SeeFigure 1.16.)
FIGURE1.16Distances given in unknown units are maddeningly useless.
There are two major systems of units used in the world:SI units(also known as the metric system) andEnglish
units(also known as the customary or imperial system).English unitswere historically used in nations once ruled
by the British Empire and are still widely used in the United States. Virtually every other country in the world now
uses SI units as the standard; the metric system is also the standard system agreed upon by scientists and
mathematicians. The acronym “SI” is derived from the FrenchSystème International.
SI Units: Fundamental and Derived Units
Table 1.1gives the fundamental SI units that are used throughout this textbook. This text uses non-SI units in a few
applications where they are in very common use, such as the measurement of blood pressure in millimeters of
mercury (mm Hg). Whenever non-SI units are discussed, they will be tied to SI units through conversions.
Length Mass Time Electric Current
meter (m) kilogram (kg) second (s) ampere (A)
TABLE1.1Fundamental SI Units
It is an intriguing fact that some physical quantities are more fundamental than others and that the most
fundamental physical quantities can be definedonlyin terms of the procedure used to measure them. The units in
which they are measured are thus calledfundamental units. In this textbook, the fundamental physical quantities
are taken to be length, mass, time, and electric current. (Note that electric current will not be introduced until much
later in this text.) All other physical quantities, such as force and electric charge, can be expressed as algebraic
combinations of length, mass, time, and current (for example, speed is length divided by time); these units are
calledderived units.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 35
1.2 • Physical Quantities and Units 17
Units of Time, Length, and Mass: The Second, Meter, and Kilogram
The Second
The SI unit for time, thesecond(abbreviated s), has a long history. For many years it was defined as 1/86,400 of a
mean solar day. More recently, a new standard was adopted to gain greater accuracy and to define the second in
terms of a non-varying, or constant, physical phenomenon (because the solar day is getting longer due to very
gradual slowing of the Earth’s rotation). Cesium atoms can be made to vibrate in a very steady way, and these
vibrations can be readily observed and counted. In 1967 the second was redefined as the time required for
9,192,631,770 of these vibrations. (SeeFigure 1.17.) Accuracy in the fundamental units is essential, because all
measurements are ultimately expressed in terms of fundamental units and can be no more accurate than are the
fundamental units themselves.
FIGURE1.17An atomic clock such as this one uses the vibrations of cesium atoms to keep time to a precision of better than a microsecond
per year. The fundamental unit of time, the second, is based on such clocks. This image is looking down from the top of an atomic fountain
nearly 30 feet tall! (credit: Steve Jurvetson/Flickr)
The Meter
The SI unit for length is themeter(abbreviated m); its definition has also changed over time to become more
accurate and precise. The meter was first defined in 1791 as 1/10,000,000 of the distance from the equator to the
North Pole. This measurement was improved in 1889 by redefining the meter to be the distance between two
engraved lines on a platinum-iridium bar now kept near Paris. By 1960, it had become possible to define the meter
even more accurately in terms of the wavelength of light, so it was again redefined as 1,650,763.73 wavelengths of
orange light emitted by krypton atoms. In 1983, the meter was given its present definition (partly for greater
accuracy) as the distance light travels in a vacuum in 1/299,792,458 of a second. (SeeFigure 1.18.) This change
defines the speed of light to be exactly 299,792,458 meters per second. The length of the meter will change if the
speed of light is someday measured with greater accuracy.
FIGURE1.18The meter is defined to be the distance light travels in 1/299,792,458 of a second in a vacuum. Distance traveled is speed
multiplied by time.
The Kilogram
The SI unit for mass is thekilogram(abbreviated kg); it was previously defined to be the mass of a platinum-iridium
cylinder kept with the old meter standard at the International Bureau of Weights and Measures near Paris. Exact
replicas of the previously defined kilogram are also kept at the United States’ National Institute of Standards and
Technology, or NIST, located in Gaithersburg, Maryland outside of Washington D.C., and at other locations around
the world. The determination of all other masses could be ultimately traced to a comparison with the standard
mass. Even though the platinum-iridium cylinder was resistant to corrosion, airborne contaminants were able to
adhere to its surface, slightly changing its mass over time. In May 2019, the scientific community adopted a more
PAGE: 36
18 1 • Introduction: The Nature of Science and Physics
stable definition of the kilogram. The kilogram is now defined in terms of the second, the meter, and Planck's
constant,h(a quantum mechanical value that relates a photon's energy to its frequency).
Electric current and its accompanying unit, the ampere, will be introduced inIntroduction to Electric Current,
Resistance, and Ohm's Lawwhen electricity and magnetism are covered. The initial modules in this textbook are
concerned with mechanics, fluids, heat, and waves. In these subjects all pertinent physical quantities can be
expressed in terms of the fundamental units of length, mass, and time.
Metric Prefixes
SI units are part of themetric system. The metric system is convenient for scientific and engineering calculations
because the units are categorized by factors of 10.Table 1.2gives metric prefixes and symbols used to denote
various factors of 10.
Metric systems have the advantage that conversions of units involve only powers of 10. There are 100 centimeters
in a meter, 1000 meters in a kilometer, and so on. In nonmetric systems, such as the system of U.S. customary units,
the relationships are not as simple—there are 12 inches in a foot, 5280 feet in a mile, and so on. Another advantage
of the metric system is that the same unit can be used over extremely large ranges of values simply by using an
appropriate metric prefix. For example, distances in meters are suitable in construction, while distances in
kilometers are appropriate for air travel, and the tiny measure of nanometers are convenient in optical design. With
the metric system there is no need to invent new units for particular applications.
The termorder of magnituderefers to the scale of a value expressed in the metric system. Each power of , and
so forth are all different orders of magnitude. All quantities that can be expressed as a product of a specific power of
are said to be of thesameorder of magnitude. For example, the number can be written as , and the
number can be written as Thus, the numbers and are of the same order of magnitude:
Order of magnitude can be thought of as a ballpark estimate for the scale of a value. The diameter of an atom is on
the order of while the diameter of the Sun is on the order of
The Quest for Microscopic Standards for Basic Units
The fundamental units described in this chapter are those that produce the greatest accuracy and precision in
measurement. There is a sense among physicists that, because there is an underlying microscopic substructure
to matter, it would be most satisfying to base our standards of measurement on microscopic objects and
fundamental physical phenomena such as the speed of light. A microscopic standard has been accomplished for
the standard of time, which is based on the oscillations of the cesium atom.
The standard for length was once based on the wavelength of light (a small-scale length) emitted by a certain
type of atom, but it has been supplanted by the more precise measurement of the speed of light. If it becomes
possible to measure the mass of atoms or a particular arrangement of atoms such as a silicon sphere to greater
precision than the kilogram standard, it may become possible to base mass measurements on the small scale.
There are also possibilities that electrical phenomena on the small scale may someday allow us to base a unit of
charge on the charge of electrons and protons, but at present current and charge are related to large-scale
currents and forces between wires.
Prefix Symbol Value Example (some are approximate)
exa E exameter Em distance light travels in a century
peta P petasecond Ps 30 million years
tera T terawatt TW powerful laser output
TABLE1.2Metric Prefixes for Powers of 10 and their Symbols
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 37
1.2 • Physical Quantities and Units 19
Prefix Symbol Value Example (some are approximate)
giga G gigahertz GHz a microwave frequency
mega M megacurie MCi high radioactivity
kilo k kilometer km about 6/10 mile
hecto h hectoliter hL 26 gallons
deka da dekagram dag teaspoon of butter
— — (=1)
deci d deciliter dL less than half a soda
centi c centimeter cm fingertip thickness
milli m millimeter mm flea at its shoulders
micro µ micrometer µm detail in microscope
nano n nanogram ng small speck of dust
pico p picofarad pF small capacitor in radio
femto f femtometer fm size of a proton
atto a attosecond as time light crosses an atom
TABLE1.2Metric Prefixes for Powers of 10 and their Symbols
Known Ranges of Length, Mass, and Time
The vastness of the universe and the breadth over which physics applies are illustrated by the wide range of
examples of known lengths, masses, and times inTable 1.3. Examination of this table will give you some feeling for
the range of possible topics and numerical values. (SeeFigure 1.19andFigure 1.20.)
FIGURE1.19Tiny phytoplankton swims among crystals of ice in the Antarctic Sea. They range from a few micrometers to as much as 2
millimeters in length. (credit: Prof. Gordon T. Taylor, Stony Brook University; NOAA Corps Collections)
PAGE: 38
20 1 • Introduction: The Nature of Science and Physics
FIGURE1.20Galaxies collide 2.4 billion light years away from Earth. The tremendous range of observable phenomena in nature challenges
the imagination. (credit: NASA/CXC/UVic./A. Mahdavi et al. Optical/lensing: CFHT/UVic./H. Hoekstra et al.)
Unit Conversion and Dimensional Analysis
It is often necessary to convert from one type of unit to another. For example, if you are reading a European
cookbook, some quantities may be expressed in units of liters and you need to convert them to cups. Or, perhaps
you are reading walking directions from one location to another and you are interested in how many miles you will
be walking. In this case, you will need to convert units of feet to miles.
Let us consider a simple example of how to convert units. Let us say that we want to convert 80 meters (m) to
kilometers (km).
The first thing to do is to list the units that you have and the units that you want to convert to. In this case, we have
units inmetersand we want to convert tokilometers.
Next, we need to determine aconversion factorrelating meters to kilometers. A conversion factor is a ratio
expressing how many of one unit are equal to another unit. For example, there are 12 inches in 1 foot, 100
centimeters in 1 meter, 60 seconds in 1 minute, and so on. In this case, we know that there are 1,000 meters in 1
kilometer.
Now we can set up our unit conversion. We will write the units that we have and then multiply them by the
conversion factor so that the units cancel out, as shown:
1.1
Note that the unwanted m unit cancels, leaving only the desired km unit. You can use this method to convert
between any types of unit.
ClickAppendix Cfor a more complete list of conversion factors.
Masses in kilograms (more Times in seconds (more
Lengths in meters
precise values in parentheses) precise values in parentheses)
Present experimental limit to Mass of an electron Time for light to cross
smallest observable detail a proton
Mass of a hydrogen Mean life of an
Diameter of a proton atom extremely unstable
nucleus
TABLE1.3Approximate Values of Length, Mass, and Time
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 39
1.2 • Physical Quantities and Units 21
Masses in kilograms (more Times in seconds (more
Lengths in meters
precise values in parentheses) precise values in parentheses)
Time for one
Diameter of a uranium nucleus Mass of a bacterium oscillation of visible
light
Time for one vibration
Diameter of a hydrogen atom Mass of a mosquito
of an atom in a solid
Time for one
Thickness of membranes in
Mass of a hummingbird oscillation of an FM
cells of living organisms
radio wave
Mass of a liter of water Duration of a nerve
Wavelength of visible light
(about a quart) impulse
Time for one
Size of a grain of sand Mass of a person
heartbeat
One day
Height of a 4-year-old child Mass of a car
One year (y)
Length of a football field Mass of a large ship
About half the life
Greatest ocean depth Mass of a large iceberg expectancy of a
human
Mass of the nucleus of a
Diameter of the Earth Recorded history
comet
Distance from the Earth to the Mass of the Moon
Age of the Earth
Sun
Distance traveled by light in 1 Mass of the Earth
Age of the universe
year (a light year)
Diameter of the Milky Way Mass of the Sun
galaxy
Distance from the Earth to the Mass of the Milky Way
nearest large galaxy galaxy (current upper
(Andromeda) limit)
Mass of the known
Distance from the Earth to the
universe (current upper
edges of the known universe
limit)
TABLE1.3Approximate Values of Length, Mass, and Time
PAGE: 40
22 1 • Introduction: The Nature of Science and Physics
EXAMPLE 1.1
Unit Conversions: A Short Drive Home
Suppose that you drive the 10.0 km from your school to home in 20.0 min. Calculate your average speed (a) in
kilometers per hour (km/h) and (b) in meters per second (m/s). (Note: Average speed is distance traveled divided by
time of travel.)
Strategy
First we calculate the average speed using the given units. Then we can get the average speed into the desired units
by picking the correct conversion factor and multiplying by it. The correct conversion factor is the one that cancels
the unwanted unit and leaves the desired unit in its place.
Solution for (a)
(1) Calculate average speed. Average speed is distance traveled divided by time of travel. (Take this definition as a
given for now—average speed and other motion concepts will be covered in a later module.) In equation form,
1.2
(2) Substitute the given values for distance and time.
1.3
(3) Convert km/min to km/h: multiply by the conversion factor that will cancel minutes and leave hours. That
conversion factor is
Discussion for (a)
To check your answer, consider the following:
(1) Be sure that you have properly cancelled the units in the unit conversion. If you have written the unit conversion
factor upside down, the units will not cancel properly in the equation. If you accidentally get the ratio upside down,
then the units will not cancel; rather, they will give you the wrong units as follows:
1.4
which are obviously not the desired units of km/h.
(2) Check that the units of the final answer are the desired units. The problem asked us to solve for average speed in
units of km/h and we have indeed obtained these units.
(3) Check the significant figures. Because each of the values given in the problem has three significant figures, the
answer should also have three significant figures. The answer 30.0 km/hr does indeed have three significant figures,
so this is appropriate. Note that the significant figures in the conversion factor are not relevant because an hour is
definedto be 60 minutes, so the precision of the conversion factor is perfect.
(4) Next, check whether the answer is reasonable. Let us consider some information from the problem—if you travel
10 km in a third of an hour (20 min), you would travel three times that far in an hour. The answer does seem
reasonable.
Solution for (b)
There are several ways to convert the average speed into meters per second.
(1) Start with the answer to (a) and convert km/h to m/s. Two conversion factors are needed—one to convert hours
to seconds, and another to convert kilometers to meters.
(2) Multiplying by these yields
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 41
1.3 • Accuracy, Precision, and Significant Figures 23
1.5
1.6
Discussion for (b)
If we had started with 0.500 km/min, we would have needed different conversion factors, but the answer would
have been the same: 8.33 m/s.
You may have noted that the answers in the worked example just covered were given to three digits. Why? When do
you need to be concerned about the number of digits in something you calculate? Why not write down all the digits
your calculator produces? The moduleAccuracy, Precision, and Significant Figureswill help you answer these
questions.
Nonstandard Units
While there are numerous types of units that we are all familiar with, there are others that are much more
obscure. For example, afirkinis a unit of volume that was once used to measure beer. One firkin equals about
34 liters. To learn more about nonstandard units, use a dictionary or encyclopedia to research different “weights
and measures.” Take note of any unusual units, such as a barleycorn, that are not listed in the text. Think about
how the unit is defined and state its relationship to SI units.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Some hummingbirds beat their wings more than 50 times per second. A scientist is measuring the time it takes for a
hummingbird to beat its wings once. Which fundamental unit should the scientist use to describe the measurement?
Which factor of 10 is the scientist likely to use to describe the motion precisely? Identify the metric prefix that
corresponds to this factor of 10.
Solution
The scientist will measure the time between each movement using the fundamental unit of seconds. Because the
wings beat so fast, the scientist will probably need to measure in milliseconds, or seconds. (50 beats per
second corresponds to 20 milliseconds per beat.)
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
One cubic centimeter is equal to one milliliter. What does this tell you about the different units in the SI metric
system?
Solution
The fundamental unit of length (meter) is probably used to create the derived unit of volume (liter). The measure of
a milliliter is dependent on the measure of a centimeter.
1.3 Accuracy, Precision, and Significant Figures
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Determine the appropriate number of significant figures in both addition and subtraction, as well as
multiplication and division calculations.
• Calculate the percent uncertainty of a measurement.
PAGE: 42
24 1 • Introduction: The Nature of Science and Physics
FIGURE1.21A double-pan mechanical balance is used to compare different masses. Usually an object with unknown mass is placed in one
pan and objects of known mass are placed in the other pan. When the bar that connects the two pans is horizontal, then the masses in both
pans are equal. The “known masses” are typically metal cylinders of standard mass such as 1 gram, 10 grams, and 100 grams. (credit:
Serge Melki)
FIGURE1.22Many mechanical balances, such as double-pan balances, have been replaced by digital scales, which can typically measure
the mass of an object more precisely. Whereas a mechanical balance may only read the mass of an object to the nearest tenth of a gram,
many digital scales can measure the mass of an object up to the nearest thousandth of a gram. (credit: Karel Jakubec)
Accuracy and Precision of a Measurement
Science is based on observation and experiment—that is, on measurements.Accuracyis how close a measurement
is to the correct value for that measurement. For example, let us say that you are measuring the length of standard
computer paper. The packaging in which you purchased the paper states that it is 11.0 inches long. You measure the
length of the paper three times and obtain the following measurements: 11.1 in., 11.2 in., and 10.9 in. These
measurements are quite accurate because they are very close to the correct value of 11.0 inches. In contrast, if you
had obtained a measurement of 12 inches, your measurement would not be very accurate.
Theprecisionof a measurement system refers to how close the agreement is between repeated measurements
(which are repeated under the same conditions). Consider the example of the paper measurements. The precision
of the measurements refers to the spread of the measured values. One way to analyze the precision of the
measurements would be to determine the range, or difference, between the lowest and the highest measured
values. In that case, the lowest value was 10.9 in. and the highest value was 11.2 in. Thus, the measured values
deviated from each other by at most 0.3 in. These measurements were relatively precise because they did not vary
too much in value. However, if the measured values had been 10.9, 11.1, and 11.9, then the measurements would
not be very precise because there would be significant variation from one measurement to another.
The measurements in the paper example are both accurate and precise, but in some cases, measurements are
accurate but not precise, or they are precise but not accurate. Let us consider an example of a GPS system that is
attempting to locate the position of a restaurant in a city. Think of the restaurant location as existing at the center of
a bull’s-eye target, and think of each GPS attempt to locate the restaurant as a black dot. InFigure 1.23, you can see
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 43
1.3 • Accuracy, Precision, and Significant Figures 25
that the GPS measurements are spread out far apart from each other, but they are all relatively close to the actual
location of the restaurant at the center of the target. This indicates a low precision, high accuracy measuring system.
However, inFigure 1.24, the GPS measurements are concentrated quite closely to one another, but they are far
away from the target location. This indicates a high precision, low accuracy measuring system.
FIGURE1.23A GPS system attempts to locate a restaurant at the center of the bull’s-eye. The black dots represent each attempt to
pinpoint the location of the restaurant. The dots are spread out quite far apart from one another, indicating low precision, but they are each
rather close to the actual location of the restaurant, indicating high accuracy. (credit: Dark Evil)
FIGURE1.24In this figure, the dots are concentrated rather closely to one another, indicating high precision, but they are rather far away
from the actual location of the restaurant, indicating low accuracy. (credit: Dark Evil)
Accuracy, Precision, and Uncertainty
The degree of accuracy and precision of a measuring system are related to theuncertaintyin the measurements.
Uncertainty is a quantitative measure of how much your measured values deviate from a standard or expected
value. If your measurements are not very accurate or precise, then the uncertainty of your values will be very high.
In more general terms, uncertainty can be thought of as a disclaimer for your measured values. For example, if
someone asked you to provide the mileage on your car, you might say that it is 45,000 miles, plus or minus 500
miles. The plus or minus amount is the uncertainty in your value. That is, you are indicating that the actual mileage
of your car might be as low as 44,500 miles or as high as 45,500 miles, or anywhere in between. All measurements
contain some amount of uncertainty. In our example of measuring the length of the paper, we might say that the
length of the paper is 11 in., plus or minus 0.2 in. The uncertainty in a measurement, , is often denoted as
(“delta ”), so the measurement result would be recorded as . In our paper example, the length of the paper
could be expressed as
The factors contributing to uncertainty in a measurement include:
1. Limitations of the measuring device,
2. The skill of the person making the measurement,
3. Irregularities in the object being measured,
4. Any other factors that affect the outcome (highly dependent on the situation).
In our example, such factors contributing to the uncertainty could be the following: the smallest division on the ruler
is 0.1 in., the person using the ruler has bad eyesight, or one side of the paper is slightly longer than the other. At
any rate, the uncertainty in a measurement must be based on a careful consideration of all the factors that might
contribute and their possible effects.
PAGE: 44
26 1 • Introduction: The Nature of Science and Physics
Making Connections: Real-World Connections – Fevers or Chills?
Uncertainty is a critical piece of information, both in physics and in many other real-world applications. Imagine
you are caring for a sick child. You suspect the child has a fever, so you check their temperature with a
thermometer. What if the uncertainty of the thermometer were ? If the child’s temperature reading was
(which is normal body temperature), the “true” temperature could be anywhere from a hypothermic
to a dangerously high . A thermometer with an uncertainty of would be useless.
Percent Uncertainty
One method of expressing uncertainty is as a percent of the measured value. If a measurement is expressed with
uncertainty, , thepercent uncertainty(%unc) is defined to be
1.7
EXAMPLE 1.2
Calculating Percent Uncertainty: A Bag of Apples
A grocery store sells bags of apples. You purchase four bags over the course of a month and weigh the apples
each time. You obtain the following measurements:
• Week 1 weight:
• Week 2 weight:
• Week 3 weight:
• Week 4 weight:
You determine that the weight of the bag has an uncertainty of . What is the percent uncertainty of the
bag’s weight?
Strategy
First, observe that the expected value of the bag’s weight, , is 5 lb. The uncertainty in this value, , is 0.4 lb. We
can use the following equation to determine the percent uncertainty of the weight:
1.8
Solution
Plug the known values into the equation:
1.9
Discussion
We can conclude that the weight of the apple bag is . Consider how this percent uncertainty would change
if the bag of apples were half as heavy, but the uncertainty in the weight remained the same. Hint for future
calculations: when calculating percent uncertainty, always remember that you must multiply the fraction by 100%.
If you do not do this, you will have a decimal quantity, not a percent value.
Uncertainties in Calculations
There is an uncertainty in anything calculated from measured quantities. For example, the area of a floor calculated
from measurements of its length and width has an uncertainty because the length and width have uncertainties.
How big is the uncertainty in something you calculate by multiplication or division? If the measurements going into
the calculation have small uncertainties (a few percent or less), then themethod of adding percentscan be used
for multiplication or division. This method says thatthe percent uncertainty in a quantity calculated by multiplication
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 45
1.3 • Accuracy, Precision, and Significant Figures 27
or division is the sum of the percent uncertainties in the items used to make the calculation. For example, if a floor
has a length of and a width of , with uncertainties of and , respectively, then the area of the
floor is and has an uncertainty of . (Expressed as an area this is , which we round to
since the area of the floor is given to a tenth of a square meter.)
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
A high school track coach has just purchased a new stopwatch. The stopwatch manual states that the stopwatch
has an uncertainty of ±0.05 s. The team's top sprinter clocked a 100 meter sprint at 12.04 seconds last week and at
11.96 seconds this week. Can we conclude that this week's time was faster?
Solution
No, the uncertainty in the stopwatch is too great to effectively differentiate between the sprint times.
Precision of Measuring Tools and Significant Figures
An important factor in the accuracy and precision of measurements involves the precision of the measuring tool. In
general, a precise measuring tool is one that can measure values in very small increments. For example, a standard
ruler can measure length to the nearest millimeter, while a caliper can measure length to the nearest 0.01
millimeter. The caliper is a more precise measuring tool because it can measure extremely small differences in
length. The more precise the measuring tool, the more precise and accurate the measurements can be.
When we express measured values, we can only list as many digits as we initially measured with our measuring tool.
For example, if you use a standard ruler to measure the length of a stick, you may measure it to be . You
could not express this value as because your measuring tool was not precise enough to measure a
hundredth of a centimeter. It should be noted that the last digit in a measured value has been estimated in some
way by the person performing the measurement. For example, the person measuring the length of a stick with a
ruler notices that the stick length seems to be somewhere in between and , and they must
estimate the value of the last digit. Using the method ofsignificant figures, the rule is thatthe last digit written
down in a measurement is the first digit with some uncertainty. In order to determine the number of significant
digits in a value, start with the first measured value at the left and count the number of digits through the last digit
written on the right. For example, the measured value has three digits, or significant figures. Significant
figures indicate the precision of a measuring tool that was used to measure a value.
Zeros
Special consideration is given to zeros when counting significant figures. The zeros in 0.053 are not significant,
because they are only placekeepers that locate the decimal point. There are two significant figures in 0.053. The
zeros in 10.053 are not placekeepers but are significant—this number has five significant figures. The zeros in 1300
may or may not be significant depending on the style of writing numbers. They could mean the number is known to
the last digit, or they could be placekeepers. So 1300 could have two, three, or four significant figures. (To avoid this
ambiguity, write 1300 in scientific notation.)Zeros are significant except when they serve only as placekeepers.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Determine the number of significant figures in the following measurements:
a. 0.0009
b. 15,450.0
c.
d. 87.990
e. 30.42
Solution
(a) 1; the zeros in this number are placekeepers that indicate the decimal point
(b) 6; here, the zeros indicate that a measurement was made to the 0.1 decimal point, so the zeros are significant
(c) 1; the value signifies the decimal place, not the number of measured values
PAGE: 46
28 1 • Introduction: The Nature of Science and Physics
(d) 5; the final zero indicates that a measurement was made to the 0.001 decimal point, so it is significant
(e) 4; any zeros located in between significant figures in a number are also significant
Significant Figures in Calculations
When combining measurements with different degrees of accuracy and precision,the number of significant digits in
the final answer can be no greater than the number of significant digits in the least precise measured value. There
are two different rules, one for multiplication and division and the other for addition and subtraction, as discussed
below.
1. For multiplication and division:The result should have the same number of significant figures as the quantity
having the least significant figures entering into the calculation. For example, the area of a circle can be calculated
from its radius using . Let us see how many significant figures the area has if the radius has only two—say,
. Then,
1.10
is what you would get using a calculator that has an eight-digit output. But because the radius has only two
significant figures, it limits the calculated quantity to two significant figures or
1.11
even though is good to at least eight digits.
2. For addition and subtraction:The answer can contain no more decimal places than the least precise
measurement.Suppose that you buy 7.56-kg of potatoes in a grocery store as measured with a scale with precision
0.01 kg. Then you drop off 6.052-kg of potatoes at your laboratory as measured by a scale with precision 0.001 kg.
Finally, you go home and add 13.7 kg of potatoes as measured by a bathroom scale with precision 0.1 kg. How many
kilograms of potatoes do you now have, and how many significant figures are appropriate in the answer? The mass is
found by simple addition and subtraction:
1.12
Next, we identify the least precise measurement: 13.7 kg. This measurement is expressed to the 0.1 decimal place,
so our final answer must also be expressed to the 0.1 decimal place. Thus, the answer is rounded to the tenths
place, giving us 15.2 kg.
Significant Figures in this Text
In this text, most numbers are assumed to have three significant figures. Furthermore, consistent numbers of
significant figures are used in all worked examples. You will note that an answer given to three digits is based on
input good to at least three digits, for example. If the input has fewer significant figures, the answer will also have
fewer significant figures. Care is also taken that the number of significant figures is reasonable for the situation
posed. In some topics, particularly in optics, more accurate numbers are needed and more than three significant
figures will be used. Finally, if a number isexact, such as the two in the formula for the circumference of a circle,
, it does not affect the number of significant figures in a calculation.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Perform the following calculations and express your answer using the correct number of significant digits.
(a) A woman has two bags weighing 13.5 pounds and one bag with a weight of 10.2 pounds. What is the total weight
of the bags?
(b) The force on an object is equal to its mass multiplied by its acceleration . If a wagon with mass 55 kg
accelerates at a rate of , what is the force on the wagon? (The unit of force is called the newton, and it is
expressed with the symbol N.)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 47
1.4 • Approximation 29
Solution
(a) 37.2 pounds; Because the number of bags is an exact value, it is not considered in the significant figures.
(b) 1.4 N; Because the value 55 kg has only two significant figures, the final value must also contain two significant
figures.
1.4 Approximation
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Make reasonable approximations based on given data.
On many occasions, physicists, other scientists, and engineers need to makeapproximationsor “guesstimates” for
a particular quantity. What is the distance to a certain destination? What is the approximate density of a given item?
About how large a current will there be in a circuit? Many approximate numbers are based on formulae in which the
input quantities are known only to a limited accuracy. As you develop problem-solving skills (that can be applied to a
variety of fields through a study of physics), you will also develop skills at approximating. You will develop these
skills through thinking more quantitatively, and by being willing to take risks. As with any endeavor, experience
helps, as well as familiarity with units. These approximations allow us to rule out certain scenarios or unrealistic
numbers. Approximations also allow us to challenge others and guide us in our approaches to our scientific world.
Let us do two examples to illustrate this concept.
EXAMPLE 1.3
Approximate the Height of a Building
Can you approximate the height of one of the buildings on your campus, or in your neighborhood? Let us make an
approximation based upon the height of a person. In this example, we will calculate the height of a 39-story
building.
Strategy
Think about the average height of an adult male. We can approximate the height of the building by scaling up from
the height of a person.
Solution
Based on information in the example, we know there are 39 stories in the building. If we use the fact that the height
of one story is approximately equal to about the length of two adult humans (each human is about 2-m tall), then we
can estimate the total height of the building to be
1.13
Discussion
You can use known quantities to determine an approximate measurement of unknown quantities. If your hand
measures 10 cm across, how many hand lengths equal the width of your desk? What other measurements can you
approximate besides length?
PAGE: 48
30 1 • Introduction: The Nature of Science and Physics
EXAMPLE 1.4
Approximating Vast Numbers: a Trillion Dollars
FIGURE1.25A bank stack contains one-hundred $100 bills, and is worth $10,000. How many bank stacks make up a trillion dollars?
(credit: Andrew Magill)
The U.S. federal debt in 2021 was a little more than $28 trillion. Most of us do not have any concept of how much
even one trillion actually is. Suppose that you were given a trillion dollars in $100 bills. If you made 100-bill stacks
and used them to evenly cover a football field (between the end zones), make an approximation of how high the
money pile would become. (We will use feet/inches rather than meters here because football fields are measured in
yards.) One of your friends says 3 in., while another says 10 ft. What do you think?
Strategy
When you imagine the situation, you probably envision thousands of small stacks of 100 wrapped $100 bills, such
as you might see in movies or at a bank. Since this is an easy-to-approximate quantity, let us start there. We can find
the volume of a stack of 100 bills, find out how many stacks make up one trillion dollars, and then set this volume
equal to the area of the football field multiplied by the unknown height.
Solution
(1) Calculate the volume of a stack of 100 bills. The dimensions of a single bill are approximately 3 in. by 6 in. A
stack of 100 of these is about 0.5 in. thick. So the total volume of a stack of 100 bills is:
1.14
(2) Calculate the number of stacks. Note that a trillion dollars is equal to and a stack of one-hundred
bills is equal to or . The number of stacks you will have is:
1.15
(3) Calculate the area of a football field in square inches. The area of a football field is which gives
Because we are working in inches, we need to convert square yards to square inches:
1.16
This conversion gives us for the area of the field. (Note that we are using only one significant figure in
these calculations.)
(4) Calculate the total volume of the bills. The volume of all the -bill stacks is
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 49
1.4 • Approximation 31
(5) Calculate the height. To determine the height of the bills, use the equation:
1.17
The height of the money will be about 100 in. high. Converting this value to feet gives
1.18
Discussion
The final approximate value is much higher than the early estimate of 3 in., but the other early estimate of 10 ft (120
in.) was roughly correct. How did the approximation measure up to your first guess? What can this exercise tell you
in terms of rough “guesstimates” versus carefully calculated approximations?
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Using mental math and your understanding of fundamental units, approximate the area of a regulation basketball
court. Describe the process you used to arrive at your final approximation.
Solution
An average male is about two meters tall. It would take approximately 15 males laid out end to end to cover the
length, and about 7 to cover the width. That gives an approximate area of .
PAGE: 50
32 1 • Glossary
Glossary
accuracy the degree to which a measured value physical quantity a characteristic or property of an
agrees with correct value for that measurement object that can be measured or calculated from
approximation an estimated value based on prior other measurements
experience and reasoning physics the science concerned with describing the
classical physics physics that was developed from interactions of energy, matter, space, and time; it is
the Renaissance to the end of the 19th century especially interested in what fundamental
conversion factor a ratio expressing how many of mechanisms underlie every phenomenon
one unit are equal to another unit precision the degree to which repeated
derived units units that can be calculated using measurements agree with each other
algebraic combinations of the fundamental units quantum mechanics the study of objects smaller
English units system of measurement used in the than can be seen with a microscope
United States; includes units of measurement such relativity the study of objects moving at speeds
as feet, gallons, and pounds greater than about 1% of the speed of light, or of
fundamental units units that can only be expressed objects being affected by a strong gravitational field
relative to the procedure used to measure them scientific method a method that typically begins with
kilogram the SI unit for mass, abbreviated (kg) an observation and question that the scientist will
law a description, using concise language or a research; next, the scientist typically performs some
mathematical formula, a generalized pattern in research about the topic and then devises a
nature that is supported by scientific evidence and hypothesis; then, the scientist will test the
repeated experiments hypothesis by performing an experiment; finally, the
meter the SI unit for length, abbreviated (m) scientist analyzes the results of the experiment and
method of adding percents the percent uncertainty draws a conclusion
in a quantity calculated by multiplication or division second the SI unit for time, abbreviated (s)
is the sum of the percent uncertainties in the items SI units the international system of units that
used to make the calculation scientists in most countries have agreed to use;
metric system a system in which values can be includes units such as meters, liters, and grams
calculated in factors of 10 significant figures express the precision of a
model representation of something that is often too measuring tool used to measure a value
difficult (or impossible) to display directly theory an explanation for patterns in nature that is
modern physics the study of relativity, quantum supported by scientific evidence and verified
mechanics, or both multiple times by various groups of researchers
order of magnitude refers to the size of a quantity as uncertainty a quantitative measure of how much
it relates to a power of 10 your measured values deviate from a standard or
percent uncertainty the ratio of the uncertainty of a expected value
measurement to the measured value, expressed as units a standard used for expressing and comparing
a percentage measurements
Section Summary
1.1Physics: An Introduction of an object that can be measured or calculated
from other measurements.
• Science seeks to discover and describe the
• Units are standards for expressing and comparing
underlying order and simplicity in nature.
the measurement of physical quantities. All units
• Physics is the most basic of the sciences,
can be expressed as combinations of four
concerning itself with energy, matter, space and
fundamental units.
time, and their interactions.
• The four fundamental units we will use in this text
• Scientific laws and theories express the general
are the meter (for length), the kilogram (for mass),
truths of nature and the body of knowledge they
the second (for time), and the ampere (for electric
encompass. These laws of nature are rules that all
current). These units are part of the metric system,
natural processes appear to follow.
which uses powers of 10 to relate quantities over
1.2Physical Quantities and Units the vast ranges encountered in nature.
• The four fundamental units are abbreviated as
• Physical quantities are a characteristic or property
follows: meter, m; kilogram, kg; second, s; and
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 51
1 • Conceptual Questions 33
ampere, A. The metric system also uses a standard the agreement is between repeated
set of prefixes to denote each order of magnitude measurements.
greater than or lesser than the fundamental unit • The precision of ameasuring toolis related to the
itself. size of its measurement increments. The smaller
• Unit conversions involve changing a value the measurement increment, the more precise the
expressed in one type of unit to another type of tool.
unit. This is done by using conversion factors, • Significant figures express the precision of a
which are ratios relating equal quantities of measuring tool.
different units. • When multiplying or dividing measured values, the
final answer can contain only as many significant
1.3Accuracy, Precision, and Significant
figures as the least precise value.
Figures
• When adding or subtracting measured values, the
• Accuracy of a measured value refers to how close final answer cannot contain more decimal places
a measurement is to the correct value. The than the least precise value.
uncertainty in a measurement is an estimate of the
1.4Approximation
amount by which the measurement result may
differ from this value. Scientists often approximate the values of quantities to
• Precision of measured values refers to how close perform calculations and analyze systems.
Conceptual Questions
1.1Physics: An Introduction 9. Can classical physics be used to accurately
describe a satellite moving at a speed of 7500 m/s?
1. Models are particularly useful in relativity and
Explain why or why not.
quantum mechanics, where conditions are outside
those normally encountered by humans. What is a
1.2Physical Quantities and Units
model?
2. How does a model differ from a theory? 10. Identify some advantages of metric units.
3. If two different theories describe experimental
observations equally well, can one be said to be 1.3Accuracy, Precision, and Significant
more valid than the other (assuming both use Figures
accepted rules of logic)?
11. What is the relationship between the accuracy and
4. What determines the validity of a theory?
uncertainty of a measurement?
5. Certain criteria must be satisfied if a measurement
12. Prescriptions for vision correction are given in
or observation is to be believed. Will the criteria
units calleddiopters(D). Determine the meaning
necessarily be as strict for an expected result as for
of that unit. Obtain information (perhaps by calling
an unexpected result?
an optometrist or performing an internet search)
6. Can the validity of a model be limited, or must it be
on the minimum uncertainty with which
universally valid? How does this compare to the
corrections in diopters are determined and the
required validity of a theory or a law?
accuracy with which corrective lenses can be
7. Classical physics is a good approximation to
produced. Discuss the sources of uncertainties in
modern physics under certain circumstances. What
both the prescription and accuracy in the
are they?
manufacture of lenses.
8. When is itnecessaryto use relativistic quantum
mechanics?
Problems & Exercises
1.2Physical Quantities and Units 3. Show that . Hint: Show the
explicit steps involved in converting
1. The speed limit on some interstate highways is
roughly 100 km/h. (a) What is this in meters per
4. American football is played on a 100-yd-long field,
second? (b) How many miles per hour is this?
excluding the end zones. How long is the field in
2. A car is traveling at a speed of . (a) What is
meters? (Assume that 1 meter equals 3.281 feet.)
its speed in kilometers per hour? (b) Is it exceeding
the speed limit?
PAGE: 52
34 1 • Problems & Exercises
5. Soccer fields vary in size. A large soccer field is 115 18. (a) How many significant figures are in the
m long and 85 m wide. What are its dimensions in numbers 99 and 100? (b) If the uncertainty in
feet and inches? (Assume that 1 meter equals each number is 1, what is the percent uncertainty
3.281 feet.) in each? (c) Which is a more meaningful way to
6. What is the height in meters of a person who is 6 ft express the accuracy of these two numbers,
1.0 in. tall? (Assume that 1 meter equals 39.37 in.) significant figures or percent uncertainties?
7. Mount Everest, at 29,028 feet, is the tallest 19. (a) If your speedometer has an uncertainty of
mountain on the Earth. What is its height in at a speed of , what is the
kilometers? (Assume that 1 kilometer equals 3,281 percent uncertainty? (b) If it has the same percent
feet.) uncertainty when it reads , what is the
8. The speed of sound is measured to be on a range of speeds you could be going?
certain day. What is this in km/h? 20. (a) A person’s blood pressure is measured to be
9. Tectonic plates are large segments of the Earth’s . What is its percent uncertainty?
crust that move slowly. Suppose that one such (b) Assuming the same percent uncertainty, what
plate has an average speed of 4.0 cm/year. (a) What is the uncertainty in a blood pressure
distance does it move in 1 s at this speed? (b) What measurement of ?
is its speed in kilometers per million years? 21. A person measures their heart rate by counting
10. (a) Refer toTable 1.3to determine the average the number of beats in . If beats are
distance between the Earth and the Sun. Then counted in , what is the heart rate and
calculate the average speed of the Earth in its its uncertainty in beats per minute?
orbit in kilometers per second. (b) What is this in 22. What is the area of a circle in diameter?
meters per second? 23. If a marathon runner averages 9.5 mi/h, how long
does it take him or her to run a 26.22-mi
1.3Accuracy, Precision, and Significant marathon?
Figures 24. A marathon runner completes a
course in , 30 min, and . There is an
Express your answers to problems in this section to
uncertainty of in the distance traveled and
the correct number of significant figures and proper
an uncertainty of 1 s in the elapsed time. (a)
units.
Calculate the percent uncertainty in the distance.
11. Suppose that your bathroom scale reads your (b) Calculate the uncertainty in the elapsed time.
mass as 65 kg with a 3% uncertainty. What is the (c) What is the average speed in meters per
uncertainty in your mass (in kilograms)? second? (d) What is the uncertainty in the average
12. A good-quality measuring tape can be off by 0.50 speed?
cm over a distance of 20 m. What is its percent 25. The sides of a small rectangular box are measured
uncertainty? to be ,
13. (a) A car speedometer has a uncertainty. long. Calculate
What is the range of possible speeds when it reads its volume and uncertainty in cubic centimeters.
? (b) Convert this range to miles per hour. 26. When non-metric units were used in the United
Kingdom, a unit of mass called thepound-mass
14. An infant’s pulse rate is measured to be (lbm) was employed, where .
beats/min. What is the percent uncertainty in this (a) If there is an uncertainty of in the
measurement? pound-mass unit, what is its percent uncertainty?
15. (a) Suppose that a person has an average heart (b) Based on that percent uncertainty, what mass
rate of 72.0 beats/min. How many beats do they in pound-mass has an uncertainty of 1 kg when
have in 2.0 y? (b) In 2.00 y? (c) In 2.000 y? converted to kilograms?
16. A can contains 375 mL of soda. How much is left 27. The length and width of a rectangular room are
after 308 mL is removed? measured to be and
17. State how many significant figures are proper in . Calculate the area of the room
the results of the following calculations: (a) and its uncertainty in square meters.
(b) (c)
.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 53
1 • Problems & Exercises 35
28. A car engine moves a piston with a circular cross
section of diameter a distance
of to compress the gas in the
cylinder. (a) By what amount is the gas decreased
in volume in cubic centimeters? (b) Find the
uncertainty in this volume.
1.4Approximation
29. How many heartbeats are there in a lifetime?
30. A generation is about one-third of a lifetime.
Approximately how many generations have
FIGURE1.26This color-enhanced photo showsSalmonella
passed since the year 0 AD? typhimurium(red) attacking human cells. These bacteria are
31. How many times longer than the mean life of an commonly known for causing foodborne illness. Can you estimate
the number of atoms in each bacterium? (credit: Rocky Mountain
extremely unstable atomic nucleus is the lifetime Laboratories, NIAID, NIH)
of a human? (Hint: The lifetime of an unstable
33. Approximately how many atoms thick is a cell
atomic nucleus is on the order of .)
membrane, assuming all atoms there average
32. Calculate the approximate number of atoms in a
about twice the size of a hydrogen atom?
bacterium. Assume that the average mass of an
34. (a) What fraction of Earth’s diameter is the
atom in the bacterium is ten times the mass of a
greatest ocean depth? (b) The greatest mountain
hydrogen atom. (Hint: The mass of a hydrogen
height?
atom is on the order of and the mass of
35. (a) Calculate the number of cells in a hummingbird
a bacterium is on the order of )
assuming the mass of an average cell is ten times
the mass of a bacterium. (b) Making the same
assumption, how many cells are there in a human?
36. Assuming one nerve impulse must end before
another can begin, what is the maximum firing
rate of a nerve in impulses per second?
PAGE: 54
36 1 • Problems & Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 55
CHAPTER 2
Kinematics
FIGURE2.1The motion of an American kestrel through the air can be described by the bird’s displacement, speed, velocity, and
acceleration. When it flies in a straight line without any change in direction, its motion is said to be one dimensional. (credit: Vince Maidens,
Wikimedia Commons)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
2.1Displacement
2.2Vectors, Scalars, and Coordinate Systems
2.3Time, Velocity, and Speed
2.4Acceleration
2.5Motion Equations for Constant Acceleration in One Dimension
2.6Problem-Solving Basics for One-Dimensional Kinematics
2.7Falling Objects
2.8Graphical Analysis of One-Dimensional Motion
INTRODUCTION TO ONE-DIMENSIONAL KINEMATICS Objects are in motion everywhere we look. Everything
from a tennis game to a space-probe flyby of the planet Neptune involves motion. When you are resting, your heart
moves blood through your veins. And even in inanimate objects, there is continuous motion in the vibrations of
atoms and molecules. Questions about motion are interesting in and of themselves:How long will it take for a space
probe to get to Mars? Where will a football land if it is thrown at a certain angle?But an understanding of motion is
also key to understanding other concepts in physics. An understanding of acceleration, for example, is crucial to the
study of force.
Our formal study of physics begins withkinematicswhich is defined as thestudy of motion without considering its
causes. The word “kinematics” comes from a Greek term meaning motion and is related to other English words such
as “cinema” (movies) and “kinesiology” (the study of human motion). In one-dimensional kinematics andTwo-
Dimensional Kinematicswe will study only themotionof a football, for example, without worrying about what forces
cause or change its motion. Such considerations come in other chapters. In this chapter, we examine the simplest
PAGE: 56
38 2 • Kinematics
type of motion—namely, motion along a straight line, or one-dimensional motion. InTwo-Dimensional Kinematics,
we apply concepts developed here to study motion along curved paths (two- and three-dimensional motion); for
example, that of a car rounding a curve.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/2-introduction-to-onedimensional-
kinematics)
2.1 Displacement
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define position, displacement, distance, and distance traveled.
• Explain the relationship between position and displacement.
• Distinguish between displacement and distance traveled.
• Calculate displacement and distance given initial position, final position, and the path between the two.
FIGURE2.2These cyclists in Vietnam can be described by their position relative to buildings and a canal. Their motion can be described by
their change in position, or displacement, in the frame of reference. (credit: Suzan Black, Fotopedia)
Position
In order to describe the motion of an object, you must first be able to describe itsposition—where it is at any
particular time. More precisely, you need to specify its position relative to a convenient reference frame. Earth is
often used as a reference frame, and we often describe the position of an object as it relates to stationary objects in
that reference frame. For example, a rocket launch would be described in terms of the position of the rocket with
respect to the Earth as a whole, while a professor’s position could be described in terms of where she is in relation
to the nearby white board. (SeeFigure 2.3.) In other cases, we use reference frames that are not stationary but are
in motion relative to the Earth. To describe the position of a person in an airplane, for example, we use the airplane,
not the Earth, as the reference frame. (SeeFigure 2.4.)
Displacement
If an object moves relative to a reference frame (for example, if a professor moves to the right relative to a white
board or a passenger moves toward the rear of an airplane), then the object’s position changes. This change in
position is known asdisplacement. The word “displacement” implies that an object has moved, or has been
displaced.
Displacement
Displacement is thechange in positionof an object:
2.1
where is displacement, is the final position, and is the initial position.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 57
2.1 • Displacement 39
In this text the upper case Greek letter (delta) always means “change in” whatever quantity follows it; thus,
meanschange in position. Always solve for displacement by subtracting initial position from final position .
Note that the SI unit for displacement is the meter (m) (seePhysical Quantities and Units), but sometimes
kilometers, miles, feet, and other units of length are used. Keep in mind that when units other than the meter are
used in a problem, you may need to convert them into meters to complete the calculation.
FIGURE2.3A professor paces left and right while lecturing. Her position relative to Earth is given by . The displacement of the
professor relative to Earth is represented by an arrow pointing to the right.
FIGURE2.4A passenger moves from his seat to the back of the plane. His location relative to the airplane is given by . The
displacement of the passenger relative to the plane is represented by an arrow toward the rear of the plane. Notice that the arrow
representing his displacement is twice as long as the arrow representing the displacement of the professor (he moves twice as far) inFigure
2.3.
Note that displacement has a direction as well as a magnitude. The professor’s displacement is 2.0 m to the right,
and the airline passenger’s displacement is 4.0 m toward the rear. In one-dimensional motion, direction can be
specified with a plus or minus sign. When you begin a problem, you should select which direction is positive (usually
that will be to the right or up, but you are free to select positive as being any direction). The professor’s initial
position is and her final position is . Thus her displacement is
2.2
PAGE: 58
40 2 • Kinematics
In this coordinate system, motion to the right is positive, whereas motion to the left is negative. Similarly, the
airplane passenger’s initial position is and his final position is , so his displacement is
2.3
His displacement is negative because his motion is toward the rear of the plane, or in the negative direction in our
coordinate system.
Distance
Although displacement is described in terms of direction, distance is not.Distanceis defined to bethe magnitude or
size of displacement between two positions. Note that the distance between two positions is not the same as the
distance traveled between them.Distance traveledisthe total length of the path traveled between two positions.
Distance has no direction and, thus, no sign. For example, the distance the professor walks is 2.0 m. The distance
the airplane passenger walks is 4.0 m.
Misconception Alert: Distance Traveled vs. Magnitude of Displacement
It is important to note that thedistance traveled, however, can be greater than the magnitude of the
displacement (by magnitude, we mean just the size of the displacement without regard to its direction; that is,
just a number with a unit). For example, the professor could pace back and forth many times, perhaps walking a
distance of 150 m during a lecture, yet still end up only 2.0 m to the right of her starting point. In this case her
displacement would be +2.0 m, the magnitude of her displacement would be 2.0 m, but the distance she
traveled would be 150 m. In kinematics we nearly always deal with displacement and magnitude of
displacement, and almost never with distance traveled. One way to think about this is to assume you marked the
start of the motion and the end of the motion. The displacement is simply the difference in the position of the
two marks and is independent of the path taken in traveling between the two marks. The distance traveled,
however, is the total length of the path taken between the two marks.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
A cyclist rides 3 km west and then turns around and rides 2 km east. (a) What is their displacement? (b) What
distance do they ride? (c) What is the magnitude of their displacement?
Solution
FIGURE2.5
(a) The rider’s displacement is . (The displacement is negative because we take east to be
positive and west to be negative.)
(b) The distance traveled is .
(c) The magnitude of the displacement is .
2.2 Vectors, Scalars, and Coordinate Systems
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define and distinguish between scalar and vector quantities.
• Assign a coordinate system for a scenario involving one-dimensional motion.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 59
2.2 • Vectors, Scalars, and Coordinate Systems 41
FIGURE2.6The motion of this Eclipse Concept jet can be described in terms of the distance it has traveled (a scalar quantity) or its
displacement in a specific direction (a vector quantity). In order to specify the direction of motion, its displacement must be described
based on a coordinate system. In this case, it may be convenient to choose motion toward the left as positive motion (it is the forward
direction for the plane), although in many cases, the -coordinate runs from left to right, with motion to the right as positive and motion to
the left as negative. (credit: Armchair Aviator, Flickr)
What is the difference between distance and displacement? Whereas displacement is defined by both direction and
magnitude, distance is defined only by magnitude. Displacement is an example of a vector quantity. Distance is an
example of a scalar quantity. Avectoris any quantity with bothmagnitude and direction. Other examples of vectors
include a velocity of 90 km/h east and a force of 500 newtons straight down.
The direction of a vector in one-dimensional motion is given simply by a plus or minus sign. Vectors are
represented graphically by arrows. An arrow used to represent a vector has a length proportional to the vector’s
magnitude (e.g., the larger the magnitude, the longer the length of the vector) and points in the same direction as
the vector.
Some physical quantities, like distance, either have no direction or none is specified. Ascalaris any quantity that
has a magnitude, but no direction. For example, a temperature, the 250 kilocalories (250 Calories) of energy in
a candy bar, a 90 km/h speed limit, a person’s 1.8 m height, and a distance of 2.0 m are all scalars—quantities with
no specified direction. Note, however, that a scalar can be negative, such as a temperature. In this case, the
minus sign indicates a point on a scale rather than a direction. Scalars are never represented by arrows.
Coordinate Systems for One-Dimensional Motion
In order to describe the direction of a vector quantity, you must designate a coordinate system within the reference
frame. For one-dimensional motion, this is a simple coordinate system consisting of a one-dimensional coordinate
line. In general, when describing horizontal motion, motion to the right is usually considered positive, and motion to
the left is considered negative. With vertical motion, motion up is usually positive and motion down is negative. In
some cases, however, as with the jet inFigure 2.6, it can be more convenient to switch the positive and negative
directions. For example, if you are analyzing the motion of falling objects, it can be useful to define downwards as
the positive direction. If people in a race are running to the left, it is useful to define left as the positive direction. It
does not matter as long as the system is clear and consistent. Once you assign a positive direction and start solving
a problem, you cannot change it.
PAGE: 60
42 2 • Kinematics
FIGURE2.7It is usually convenient to consider motion upward or to the right as positive and motion downward or to the left as
negative .
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
A person’s speed can stay the same as they round a corner and changes direction. Given this information, is speed a
scalar or a vector quantity? Explain.
Solution
Speed is a scalar quantity. It does not change at all with direction changes; therefore, it has magnitude only. If it
were a vector quantity, it would change as direction changes (even if its magnitude remained constant).
2.3 Time, Velocity, and Speed
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the relationships between instantaneous velocity, average velocity, instantaneous speed, average
speed, displacement, and time.
• Calculate velocity and speed given initial position, initial time, final position, and final time.
• Derive a graph of velocity vs. time given a graph of position vs. time.
• Interpret a graph of velocity vs. time.
FIGURE2.8The motion of these racing snails can be described by their speeds and their velocities. (credit: tobitasflickr, Flickr)
There is more to motion than distance and displacement. Questions such as, “How long does a foot race take?” and
“What was the runner’s speed?” cannot be answered without an understanding of other concepts. In this section
we add definitions of time, velocity, and speed to expand our description of motion.
Time
As discussed inPhysical Quantities and Units, the most fundamental physical quantities are defined by how they are
measured. This is the case with time. Every measurement of time involves measuring a change in some physical
quantity. It may be a number on a digital clock, a heartbeat, or the position of the Sun in the sky. In physics, the
definition of time is simple—timeischange, or the interval over which change occurs. It is impossible to know that
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 61
2.3 • Time, Velocity, and Speed 43
time has passed unless something changes.
The amount of time or change is calibrated by comparison with a standard. The SI unit for time is the second,
abbreviated s. We might, for example, observe that a certain pendulum makes one full swing every 0.75 s. We could
then use the pendulum to measure time by counting its swings or, of course, by connecting the pendulum to a clock
mechanism that registers time on a dial. This allows us to not only measure the amount of time, but also to
determine a sequence of events.
How does time relate to motion? We are usually interested in elapsed time for a particular motion, such as how long
it takes an airplane passenger to get from his seat to the back of the plane. To find elapsed time, we note the time at
the beginning and end of the motion and subtract the two. For example, a lecture may start at 11:00A.M.and end at
11:50A.M., so that the elapsed time would be 50 min.Elapsed time is the difference between the ending time
and beginning time,
2.4
where is the change in time or elapsed time, is the time at the end of the motion, and is the time at the
beginning of the motion. (As usual, the delta symbol, , means the change in the quantity that follows it.)
Life is simpler if the beginning time is taken to be zero, as when we use a stopwatch. If we were using a
stopwatch, it would simply read zero at the start of the lecture and 50 min at the end. If , then .
In this text, for simplicity’s sake,
• motion starts at time equal to zero
• the symbol is used for elapsed time unless otherwise specified
Velocity
Your notion of velocity is probably the same as its scientific definition. You know that if you have a large
displacement in a small amount of time you have a large velocity, and that velocity has units of distance divided by
time, such as miles per hour or kilometers per hour.
Average Velocity
Average velocityisdisplacement (change in position) divided by the time of travel,
2.5
where is theaverage(indicated by the bar over the ) velocity, is the change in position (or displacement),
and and are the final and beginning positions at times and , respectively. If the starting time is
taken to be zero, then the average velocity is simply
2.6
Notice that this definition indicates thatvelocity is a vector because displacement is a vector. It has both magnitude
and direction. The SI unit for velocity is meters per second or m/s, but many other units, such as km/h, mi/h (also
written as mph), and cm/s, are in common use. Suppose, for example, an airplane passenger took 5 seconds to
move −4 m (the negative sign indicates that displacement is toward the back of the plane). His average velocity
would be
2.7
The minus sign indicates the average velocity is also toward the rear of the plane.
The average velocity of an object does not tell us anything about what happens to it between the starting point and
ending point, however. For example, we cannot tell from average velocity whether the airplane passenger stops
momentarily or backs up before he goes to the back of the plane. To get more details, we must consider smaller
PAGE: 62
44 2 • Kinematics
segments of the trip over smaller time intervals.
FIGURE2.9A more detailed record of an airplane passenger heading toward the back of the plane, showing smaller segments of his trip.
The smaller the time intervals considered in a motion, the more detailed the information. When we carry this
process to its logical conclusion, we are left with an infinitesimally small interval. Over such an interval, the average
velocity becomes theinstantaneous velocityor thevelocity at a specific instant. A car’s speedometer, for example,
shows the magnitude (but not the direction) of the instantaneous velocity of the car. (Police give tickets based on
instantaneous velocity, but when calculating how long it will take to get from one place to another on a road trip, you
need to use average velocity.)Instantaneous velocity is the average velocity at a specific instant in time (or over
an infinitesimally small time interval).
Mathematically, finding instantaneous velocity, , at a precise instant can involve taking a limit, a calculus
operation beyond the scope of this text. However, under many circumstances, we can find precise values for
instantaneous velocity without calculus.
Speed
In everyday language, most people use the terms “speed” and “velocity” interchangeably. In physics, however, they
do not have the same meaning and they are distinct concepts. One major difference is that speed has no direction.
Thusspeed is a scalar. Just as we need to distinguish between instantaneous velocity and average velocity, we also
need to distinguish between instantaneous speed and average speed.
Instantaneous speedis the magnitude of instantaneous velocity. For example, suppose the airplane passenger at
one instant had an instantaneous velocity of −3.0 m/s (the minus meaning toward the rear of the plane). At that
same time his instantaneous speed was 3.0 m/s. Or suppose that at one time during a shopping trip your
instantaneous velocity is 40 km/h due north. Your instantaneous speed at that instant would be 40 km/h—the same
magnitude but without a direction. Average speed, however, is very different from average velocity.Average speed
is the distance traveled divided by elapsed time.
We have noted that distance traveled can be greater than the magnitude of displacement. So average speed can be
greater than average velocity, which is displacement divided by time. For example, if you drive to a store and return
home in half an hour, and your car’s odometer shows the total distance traveled was 6 km, then your average speed
was 12 km/h. Your average velocity, however, was zero, because your displacement for the round trip is zero.
(Displacement is change in position and, thus, is zero for a round trip.) Thus average speed isnotsimply the
magnitude of average velocity.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 63
2.3 • Time, Velocity, and Speed 45
FIGURE2.10During a 30-minute round trip to the store, the total distance traveled is 6 km. The average speed is 12 km/h. The
displacement for the round trip is zero, since there was no net change in position. Thus the average velocity is zero.
Another way of visualizing the motion of an object is to use a graph. A plot of position or of velocity as a function of
time can be very useful. For example, for this trip to the store, the position, velocity, and speed-vs.-time graphs are
displayed inFigure 2.11. (Note that these graphs depict a very simplifiedmodelof the trip. We are assuming that
speed is constant during the trip, which is unrealistic given that we’ll probably stop at the store. But for simplicity’s
sake, we will model it with no stops or changes in speed. We are also assuming that the route between the store and
the house is a perfectly straight line.)
PAGE: 64
46 2 • Kinematics
FIGURE2.11Position vs. time, velocity vs. time, and speed vs. time on a trip. Note that the velocity for the return trip is negative.
Making Connections: Take-Home Investigation—Getting a Sense of Speed
If you have spent much time driving, you probably have a good sense of speeds between about 10 and 70 miles
per hour. But what are these in meters per second? What do we mean when we say that something is moving at
10 m/s? To get a better sense of what these values really mean, do some observations and calculations on your
own:
• calculate typical car speeds in meters per second
• estimate jogging and walking speed by timing yourself; convert the measurements into both m/s and mi/h
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 65
2.4 • Acceleration 47
• determine the speed of an ant, snail, or falling leaf
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
A commuter train travels from Baltimore to Washington, DC, and back in 1 hour and 45 minutes. The distance
between the two stations is approximately 40 miles. What is (a) the average velocity of the train, and (b) the average
speed of the train in m/s?
Solution
(a) The average velocity of the train is zero because ; the train ends up at the same place it starts.
(b) The average speed of the train is calculated below. Note that the train travels 40 miles one way and 40 miles
back, for a total distance of 80 miles.
2.8
2.9
2.4 Acceleration
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define and distinguish between instantaneous acceleration, average acceleration, and deceleration.
• Calculate acceleration given initial time, initial velocity, final time, and final velocity.
FIGURE2.12A plane decelerates, or slows down, as it comes in for landing in St. Maarten. Its acceleration is opposite in direction to its
velocity. (credit: Steve Conry, Flickr)
In everyday conversation, to accelerate means to speed up. The accelerator in a car can in fact cause it to speed up.
The greater theacceleration, the greater the change in velocity over a given time. The formal definition of
acceleration is consistent with these notions, but more inclusive.
Average Acceleration
Average Accelerationisthe rate at which velocity changes,
2.10
where is average acceleration, is velocity, and is time. (The bar over the meansaverageacceleration.)
Because acceleration is velocity in m/s divided by time in s, the SI units for acceleration are , meters per
second squared or meters per second per second, which literally means by how many meters per second the
velocity changes every second.
PAGE: 66
48 2 • Kinematics
Recall that velocity is a vector—it has both magnitude and direction. This means that a change in velocity can be a
change in magnitude (or speed), but it can also be a change indirection. For example, if a car turns a corner at
constant speed, it is accelerating because its direction is changing. The quicker you turn, the greater the
acceleration. So there is an acceleration when velocity changes either in magnitude (an increase or decrease in
speed) or in direction, or both.
Acceleration as a Vector
Acceleration is a vector in the same direction as thechangein velocity, . Since velocity is a vector, it can
change either in magnitude or in direction. Acceleration is therefore a change in either speed or direction, or
both.
Keep in mind that although acceleration is in the direction of thechangein velocity, it is not always in the direction of
motion. When an object slows down, its acceleration is opposite to the direction of its motion. This is known as
deceleration.
FIGURE2.13A subway train in Sao Paulo, Brazil, decelerates as it comes into a station. It is accelerating in a direction opposite to its
direction of motion. (credit: Yusuke Kawasaki, Flickr)
Misconception Alert: Deceleration vs. Negative Acceleration
Deceleration always refers to acceleration in the direction opposite to the direction of the velocity. Deceleration
always reduces speed. Negative acceleration, however, is accelerationin the negative direction in the chosen
coordinate system. Negative acceleration may or may not be deceleration, and deceleration may or may not be
considered negative acceleration. For example, considerFigure 2.14.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 67
2.4 • Acceleration 49
FIGURE2.14(a) This car is speeding up as it moves toward the right. It therefore has positive acceleration in our coordinate system.
(b) This car is slowing down as it moves toward the right. Therefore, it has negative acceleration in our coordinate system, because its
acceleration is toward the left. The car is also decelerating: the direction of its acceleration is opposite to its direction of motion. (c)
This car is moving toward the left, but slowing down over time. Therefore, its acceleration is positive in our coordinate system because
it is toward the right. However, the car is decelerating because its acceleration is opposite to its motion. (d) This car is speeding up as it
moves toward the left. It has negative acceleration because it is accelerating toward the left. However, because its acceleration is in
the same direction as its motion, it is speeding up (notdecelerating).
EXAMPLE 2.1
Calculating Acceleration: A Racehorse Leaves the Gate
A racehorse coming out of the gate accelerates from rest to a velocity of 15.0 m/s due west in 1.80 s. What is its
average acceleration?
PAGE: 68
50 2 • Kinematics
FIGURE2.15(credit: Jon Sullivan, PD Photo.org)
Strategy
First we draw a sketch and assign a coordinate system to the problem. This is a simple problem, but it always helps
to visualize it. Notice that we assign east as positive and west as negative. Thus, in this case, we have negative
velocity.
FIGURE2.16
We can solve this problem by identifying and from the given information and then calculating the average
acceleration directly from the equation .
Solution
1. Identify the knowns. , (the negative sign indicates direction toward the west),
.
2. Find the change in velocity. Since the horse is going from zero to , its change in velocity equals its final
velocity: .
3. Plug in the known values ( and ) and solve for the unknown .
2.11
Discussion
The negative sign for acceleration indicates that acceleration is toward the west. An acceleration of due
west means that the horse increases its velocity by 8.33 m/s due west each second, that is, 8.33 meters per second
per second, which we write as . This is truly an average acceleration, because the ride is not smooth. We
shall see later that an acceleration of this magnitude would require the rider to hang on with a force nearly equal to
his weight.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 69
2.4 • Acceleration 51
Instantaneous Acceleration
Instantaneous acceleration , or theacceleration at a specific instant in time, is obtained by the same process as
discussed for instantaneous velocity inTime, Velocity, and Speed—that is, by considering an infinitesimally small
interval of time. How do we find instantaneous acceleration using only algebra? The answer is that we choose an
average acceleration that is representative of the motion.Figure 2.17shows graphs of instantaneous acceleration
versus time for two very different motions. InFigure 2.17(a), the acceleration varies slightly and the average over
the entire interval is nearly the same as the instantaneous acceleration at any time. In this case, we should treat this
motion as if it had a constant acceleration equal to the average (in this case about ). InFigure 2.17(b), the
acceleration varies drastically over time. In such situations it is best to consider smaller time intervals and choose
an average acceleration for each. For example, we could consider motion over the time intervals from 0 to 1.0 s and
from 1.0 to 3.0 s as separate motions with accelerations of and , respectively.
FIGURE2.17Graphs of instantaneous acceleration versus time for two different one-dimensional motions. (a) Here acceleration varies
only slightly and is always in the same direction, since it is positive. The average over the interval is nearly the same as the acceleration at
any given time. (b) Here the acceleration varies greatly, perhaps representing a package on a post office conveyor belt that is accelerated
forward and backward as it bumps along. It is necessary to consider small time intervals (such as from 0 to 1.0 s) with constant or nearly
constant acceleration in such a situation.
The next several examples consider the motion of the subway train shown inFigure 2.18. In (a) the shuttle moves to
the right, and in (b) it moves to the left. The examples are designed to further illustrate aspects of motion and to
illustrate some of the reasoning that goes into solving problems.
PAGE: 70
52 2 • Kinematics
FIGURE2.18One-dimensional motion of a subway train considered inExample 2.2,Example 2.3,Example 2.4,Example 2.5,Example 2.6,
andExample 2.7. Here we have chosen the -axis so that + means to the right and means to the left for displacements, velocities, and
accelerations. (a) The subway train moves to the right from to . Its displacement is +2.0 km. (b) The train moves to the left from
to . Its displacement is . (Note that the prime symbol (′) is used simply to distinguish between displacement in the two
different situations. The distances of travel and the size of the cars are on different scales to fit everything into the diagram.)
EXAMPLE 2.2
Calculating Displacement: A Subway Train
What are the magnitude and sign of displacements for the motions of the subway train shown in parts (a) and (b) of
Figure 2.18?
Strategy
A drawing with a coordinate system is already provided, so we don’t need to make a sketch, but we should analyze it
to make sure we understand what it is showing. Pay particular attention to the coordinate system. To find
displacement, we use the equation . This is straightforward since the initial and final positions are
given.
Solution
1. Identify the knowns. In the figure we see that and for part (a), and
and for part (b).
2. Solve for displacement in part (a).
2.12
3. Solve for displacement in part (b).
2.13
Discussion
The direction of the motion in (a) is to the right and therefore its displacement has a positive sign, whereas motion in
(b) is to the left and thus has a negative sign.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 71
2.4 • Acceleration 53
EXAMPLE 2.3
Comparing Distance Traveled with Displacement: A Subway Train
What are the distances traveled for the motions shown in parts (a) and (b) of the subway train inFigure 2.18?
Strategy
To answer this question, think about the definitions of distance and distance traveled, and how they are related to
displacement. Distance between two positions is defined to be the magnitude of displacement, which was found in
Example 2.2. Distance traveled is the total length of the path traveled between the two positions. (See
Displacement.) In the case of the subway train shown inFigure 2.18, the distance traveled is the same as the
distance between the initial and final positions of the train.
Solution
1. The displacement for part (a) was +2.00 km. Therefore, the distance between the initial and final positions was
2.00 km, and the distance traveled was 2.00 km.
2. The displacement for part (b) was Therefore, the distance between the initial and final positions was
1.50 km, and the distance traveled was 1.50 km.
Discussion
Distance is a scalar. It has magnitude but no sign to indicate direction.
EXAMPLE 2.4
Calculating Acceleration: A Subway Train Speeding Up
Suppose the train inFigure 2.18(a) accelerates from rest to 30.0 km/h in the first 20.0 s of its motion. What is its
average acceleration during that time interval?
Strategy
It is worth it at this point to make a simple sketch:
FIGURE2.19
This problem involves three steps. First we must determine the change in velocity, then we must determine the
change in time, and finally we use these values to calculate the acceleration.
Solution
1. Identify the knowns. (the trains starts at rest), , and .
2. Calculate . Since the train starts from rest, its change in velocity is , where the plus sign
means velocity to the right.
3. Plug in known values and solve for the unknown, .
PAGE: 72
54 2 • Kinematics
2.14
4. Since the units are mixed (we have both hours and seconds for time), we need to convert everything into SI units
of meters and seconds. (SeePhysical Quantities and Unitsfor more guidance.)
2.15
Discussion
The plus sign means that acceleration is to the right. This is reasonable because the train starts from rest and ends
up with a velocity to the right (also positive). So acceleration is in the same direction as thechangein velocity, as is
always the case.
EXAMPLE 2.5
Calculate Acceleration: A Subway Train Slowing Down
Now suppose that at the end of its trip, the train inFigure 2.18(a) slows to a stop from a speed of 30.0 km/h in 8.00
s. What is its average acceleration while stopping?
Strategy
FIGURE2.20
In this case, the train is decelerating and its acceleration is negative because it is toward the left. As in the previous
example, we must find the change in velocity and the change in time and then solve for acceleration.
Solution
1. Identify the knowns. , (the train is stopped, so its velocity is 0), and .
2. Solve for the change in velocity, .
2.16
3. Plug in the knowns, and , and solve for .
2.17
4. Convert the units to meters and seconds.
2.18
Discussion
The minus sign indicates that acceleration is to the left. This sign is reasonable because the train initially has a
positive velocity in this problem, and a negative acceleration would oppose the motion. Again, acceleration is in the
same direction as thechangein velocity, which is negative here. This acceleration can be called a deceleration
because it has a direction opposite to the velocity.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 73
2.4 • Acceleration 55
The graphs of position, velocity, and acceleration vs. time for the trains inExample 2.4andExample 2.5are
displayed inFigure 2.21. (We have taken the velocity to remain constant from 20 to 40 s, after which the train
decelerates.)
FIGURE2.21(a) Position of the train over time. Notice that the train’s position changes slowly at the beginning of the journey, then more
and more quickly as it picks up speed. Its position then changes more slowly as it slows down at the end of the journey. In the middle of the
journey, while the velocity remains constant, the position changes at a constant rate. (b) Velocity of the train over time. The train’s velocity
increases as it accelerates at the beginning of the journey. It remains the same in the middle of the journey (where there is no acceleration).
It decreases as the train decelerates at the end of the journey. (c) The acceleration of the train over time. The train has positive acceleration
as it speeds up at the beginning of the journey. It has no acceleration as it travels at constant velocity in the middle of the journey. Its
acceleration is negative as it slows down at the end of the journey.
PAGE: 74
56 2 • Kinematics
EXAMPLE 2.6
Calculating Average Velocity: The Subway Train
What is the average velocity of the train in part b ofExample 2.2, and shown again below, if it takes 5.00 min to
make its trip?
FIGURE2.22
Strategy
Average velocity is displacement divided by time. It will be negative here, since the train moves to the left and has a
negative displacement.
Solution
1. Identify the knowns. , , .
2. Determine displacement, . We found to be inExample 2.2.
3. Solve for average velocity.
2.19
4. Convert units.
2.20
Discussion
The negative velocity indicates motion to the left.
EXAMPLE 2.7
Calculating Deceleration: The Subway Train
Finally, suppose the train inFigure 2.22slows to a stop from a velocity of 20.0 km/h in 10.0 s. What is its average
acceleration?
Strategy
Once again, let’s draw a sketch:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 75
2.4 • Acceleration 57
FIGURE2.23
As before, we must find the change in velocity and the change in time to calculate average acceleration.
Solution
1. Identify the knowns. , , .
2. Calculate . The change in velocity here is actually positive, since
2.21
3. Solve for .
2.22
4. Convert units.
2.23
Discussion
The plus sign means that acceleration is to the right. This is reasonable because the train initially has a negative
velocity (to the left) in this problem and a positive acceleration opposes the motion (and so it is to the right). Again,
acceleration is in the same direction as thechangein velocity, which is positive here. As inExample 2.5, this
acceleration can be called a deceleration since it is in the direction opposite to the velocity.
Sign and Direction
Perhaps the most important thing to note about these examples is the signs of the answers. In our chosen
coordinate system, plus means the quantity is to the right and minus means it is to the left. This is easy to imagine
for displacement and velocity. But it is a little less obvious for acceleration. Most people interpret negative
acceleration as the slowing of an object. This was not the case inExample 2.7, where a positive acceleration slowed
a negative velocity. The crucial distinction was that the acceleration was in the opposite direction from the velocity.
In fact, a negative acceleration willincreasea negative velocity. For example, the train moving to the left inFigure
2.22is sped up by an acceleration to the left. In that case, both and are negative. The plus and minus signs give
the directions of the accelerations. If acceleration has the same sign as the velocity, the object is speeding up. If
acceleration has the opposite sign as the velocity, the object is slowing down.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
An airplane lands on a runway traveling east. Describe its acceleration.
Solution
If we take east to be positive, then the airplane has negative acceleration, as it is accelerating toward the west. It is
also decelerating: its acceleration is opposite in direction to its velocity.
PAGE: 76
58 2 • Kinematics
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Moving Man Simulation
Learn about position, velocity, and acceleration graphs. Move the little man back and forth with the mouse and plot
his motion. Set the position, velocity, or acceleration and let the simulation move the man for you.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/l/02moving_man).
2.5 Motion Equations for Constant Acceleration in One Dimension
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Calculate displacement of an object that is not accelerating, given initial position and velocity.
• Calculate final velocity of an accelerating object, given initial velocity, acceleration, and time.
• Calculate displacement and final position of an accelerating object, given initial position, initial velocity,
time, and acceleration.
FIGURE2.24Kinematic equations can help us describe and predict the motion of moving objects such as these kayaks racing in Newbury,
England. (credit: Barry Skeates, Flickr)
We might know that the greater the acceleration of, say, a car moving away from a stop sign, the greater the
displacement in a given time. But we have not developed a specific equation that relates acceleration and
displacement. In this section, we develop some convenient equations for kinematic relationships, starting from the
definitions of displacement, velocity, and acceleration already covered.
Notation:t,x,v,a
First, let us make some simplifications in notation. Taking the initial time to be zero, as if time is measured with a
stopwatch, is a great simplification. Since elapsed time is , taking means that , the final
time on the stopwatch. When initial time is taken to be zero, we use the subscript 0 to denote initial values of
position and velocity. That is, is the initial positionand is the initial velocity. We put no subscripts on the final
values. That is, is the final time, is the final position, and is the final velocity. This gives a simpler expression for
elapsed time—now, . It also simplifies the expression for displacement, which is now . Also, it
simplifies the expression for change in velocity, which is now . To summarize, using the simplified
notation, with the initial time taken to be zero,
2.24
wherethe subscript 0 denotes an initial value and the absence of a subscript denotes a final valuein whatever
motion is under consideration.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 77
2.5 • Motion Equations for Constant Acceleration in One Dimension 59
We now make the important assumption thatacceleration is constant. This assumption allows us to avoid using
calculus to find instantaneous acceleration. Since acceleration is constant, the average and instantaneous
accelerations are equal. That is,
2.25
so we use the symbol for acceleration at all times. Assuming acceleration to be constant does not seriously limit
the situations we can study nor degrade the accuracy of our treatment. For one thing, accelerationisconstant in a
great number of situations. Furthermore, in many other situations we can accurately describe motion by assuming a
constant acceleration equal to the average acceleration for that motion. Finally, in motions where acceleration
changes drastically, such as a car accelerating to top speed and then braking to a stop, the motion can be
considered in separate parts, each of which has its own constant acceleration.
Solving for Displacement ( ) and Final Position ( ) from Average Velocity when
Acceleration ( ) is Constant
To get our first two new equations, we start with the definition of average velocity:
2.26
Substituting the simplified notation for and yields
2.27
Solving for yields
2.28
where the average velocity is
2.29
The equation reflects the fact that, when acceleration is constant, is just the simple average of the
initial and final velocities. For example, if you steadily increase your velocity (that is, with constant acceleration)
from 30 to 60 km/h, then your average velocity during this steady increase is 45 km/h. Using the equation
to check this, we see that
2.30
which seems logical.
EXAMPLE 2.8
Calculating Displacement: How Far does the Jogger Run?
A jogger runs down a straight stretch of road with an average velocity of 4.00 m/s for 2.00 min. What is his final
position, taking his initial position to be zero?
Strategy
Draw a sketch.
PAGE: 78
60 2 • Kinematics
FIGURE2.25
The final position is given by the equation
2.31
To find , we identify the values of , , and from the statement of the problem and substitute them into the
equation.
Solution
1. Identify the knowns. , , and .
2. Enter the known values into the equation.
2.32
Discussion
Velocity and final displacement are both positive, which means they are in the same direction.
The equation gives insight into the relationship between displacement, average velocity, and time. It
shows, for example, that displacement is a linear function of average velocity. (By linear function, we mean that
displacement depends on rather than on raised to some other power, such as . When graphed, linear
functions look like straight lines with a constant slope.) On a car trip, for example, we will get twice as far in a given
time if we average 90 km/h than if we average 45 km/h.
FIGURE2.26There is a linear relationship between displacement and average velocity. For a given time , an object moving twice as fast as
another object will move twice as far as the other object.
Solving for Final Velocity
We can derive another useful equation by manipulating the definition of acceleration.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 79
2.5 • Motion Equations for Constant Acceleration in One Dimension 61
2.33
Substituting the simplified notation for and gives us
2.34
Solving for yields
2.35
EXAMPLE 2.9
Calculating Final Velocity: An Airplane Slowing Down after Landing
An airplane lands with an initial velocity of 70.0 m/s and then decelerates at for 40.0 s. What is its final
velocity?
Strategy
Draw a sketch. We draw the acceleration vector in the direction opposite the velocity vector because the plane is
decelerating.
FIGURE2.27
Solution
1. Identify the knowns. , , .
2. Identify the unknown. In this case, it is final velocity,
.
3. Determine which equation to use. We can calculate the final velocity using the equation .
4. Plug in the known values and solve.
2.36
Discussion
The final velocity is much less than the initial velocity, as desired when slowing down, but still positive. With jet
engines, reverse thrust could be maintained long enough to stop the plane and start moving it backward. That would
be indicated by a negative final velocity, which is not the case here.
FIGURE2.28The airplane lands with an initial velocity of 70.0 m/s and slows to a final velocity of 10.0 m/s before heading for the terminal.
PAGE: 80
62 2 • Kinematics
Note that the acceleration is negative because its direction is opposite to its velocity, which is positive.
In addition to being useful in problem solving, the equation gives us insight into the relationships
among velocity, acceleration, and time. From it we can see, for example, that
• final velocity depends on how large the acceleration is and how long it lasts
• if the acceleration is zero, then the final velocity equals the initial velocity , as expected (i.e., velocity is
constant)
• if is negative, then the final velocity is less than the initial velocity
(All of these observations fit our intuition, and it is always useful to examine basic equations in light of our intuition
and experiences to check that they do indeed describe nature accurately.)
Making Connections: Real-World Connection
FIGURE2.29The Space ShuttleEndeavorblasts off from the Kennedy Space Center in February 2010. (credit: Matthew Simantov,
Flickr)
An intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) has a larger average acceleration than the Space Shuttle and
achieves a greater velocity in the first minute or two of flight (actual ICBM burn times are classified—short-burn-
time missiles are more difficult for an enemy to destroy). But the Space Shuttle obtains a greater final velocity,
so that it can orbit the earth rather than come directly back down as an ICBM does. The Space Shuttle does this
by accelerating for a longer time.
Solving for Final Position When Velocity is Not Constant ( )
We can combine the equations above to find a third equation that allows us to calculate the final position of an
object experiencing constant acceleration. We start with
2.37
Adding to each side of this equation and dividing by 2 gives
2.38
Since for constant acceleration, then
2.39
Now we substitute this expression for into the equation for displacement, , yielding
2.40
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 81
2.5 • Motion Equations for Constant Acceleration in One Dimension 63
EXAMPLE 2.10
Calculating Displacement of an Accelerating Object: Dragsters
Dragsters can achieve average accelerations of . Suppose such a dragster accelerates from rest at this
rate for 5.56 s. How far does it travel in this time?
FIGURE2.30U.S. Army Top Fuel pilot Tony “The Sarge” Schumacher begins a race with a controlled burnout. (credit: Lt. Col. William
Thurmond. Photo Courtesy of U.S. Army.)
Strategy
Draw a sketch.
FIGURE2.31
We are asked to find displacement, which is if we take to be zero. (Think about it like the starting line of a race.
It can be anywhere, but we call it 0 and measure all other positions relative to it.) We can use the equation
once we identify , , and from the statement of the problem.
Solution
1. Identify the knowns.Starting from rest means that , is given as and is given as 5.56 s.
2. Plug the known values into the equation to solve for the unknown :
2.41
Since the initial position and velocity are both zero, this simplifies to
2.42
Substituting the identified values of and gives
2.43
yielding
2.44
PAGE: 82
64 2 • Kinematics
Discussion
If we convert 402 m to miles, we find that the distance covered is very close to one quarter of a mile, the standard
distance for drag racing. So the answer is reasonable. This is an impressive displacement in only 5.56 s, but top-
notch dragsters can do a quarter mile in even less time than this.
What else can we learn by examining the equation We see that:
• displacement depends on the square of the elapsed time when acceleration is not zero. InExample 2.10, the
dragster covers only one fourth of the total distance in the first half of the elapsed time
• if acceleration is zero, then the initial velocity equals average velocity ( ) and
becomes
Solving for Final Velocity when Velocity Is Not Constant ( )
A fourth useful equation can be obtained from another algebraic manipulation of previous equations.
If we solve for , we get
2.45
Substituting this and into , we get
2.46
EXAMPLE 2.11
Calculating Final Velocity: Dragsters
Calculate the final velocity of the dragster inExample 2.10without using information about time.
Strategy
Draw a sketch.
FIGURE2.32
The equation is ideally suited to this task because it relates velocities, acceleration, and
displacement, and no time information is required.
Solution
1. Identify the known values. We know that , since the dragster starts from rest. Then we note that
(this was the answer inExample 2.10). Finally, the average acceleration was given to be
.
2. Plug the knowns into the equation and solve for
2.47
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 83
2.5 • Motion Equations for Constant Acceleration in One Dimension 65
Thus
2.48
To get , we take the square root:
2.49
Discussion
145 m/s is about 522 km/h or about 324 mi/h, but even this breakneck speed is short of the record for the quarter
mile. Also, note that a square root has two values; we took the positive value to indicate a velocity in the same
direction as the acceleration.
An examination of the equation can produce further insights into the general relationships
among physical quantities:
• The final velocity depends on how large the acceleration is and the distance over which it acts
• For a fixed deceleration, a car that is going twice as fast doesn’t simply stop in twice the distance—it takes much
further to stop. (This is why we have reduced speed zones near schools.)
Putting Equations Together
In the following examples, we further explore one-dimensional motion, but in situations requiring slightly more
algebraic manipulation. The examples also give insight into problem-solving techniques. The box below provides
easy reference to the equations needed.
Summary of Kinematic Equations (constant )
2.50
2.51
2.52
2.53
2.54
EXAMPLE 2.12
Calculating Displacement: How Far Does a Car Go When Coming to a Halt?
On dry concrete, a car can decelerate at a rate of , whereas on wet concrete it can decelerate at only
. Find the distances necessary to stop a car moving at 30.0 m/s (about 110 km/h) (a) on dry concrete and
(b) on wet concrete. (c) Repeat both calculations, finding the displacement from the point where the driver sees a
traffic light turn red, taking into account his reaction time of 0.500 s to get his foot on the brake.
Strategy
Draw a sketch.
PAGE: 84
66 2 • Kinematics
FIGURE2.33
In order to determine which equations are best to use, we need to list all of the known values and identify exactly
what we need to solve for. We shall do this explicitly in the next several examples, using tables to set them off.
Solution for (a)
1. Identify the knowns and what we want to solve for. We know that ; ; ( is
negative because it is in a direction opposite to velocity). We take to be 0. We are looking for displacement , or
.
2. Identify the equation that will help up solve the problem. The best equation to use is
2.55
This equation is best because it includes only one unknown, . We know the values of all the other variables in this
equation. (There are other equations that would allow us to solve for , but they require us to know the stopping
time, , which we do not know. We could use them but it would entail additional calculations.)
3. Rearrange the equation to solve for .
2.56
4. Enter known values.
2.57
Thus,
2.58
Solution for (b)
This part can be solved in exactly the same manner as Part A. The only difference is that the deceleration is
. The result is
2.59
Solution for (c)
Once the driver reacts, the stopping distance is the same as it is in Parts A and B for dry and wet concrete. So to
answer this question, we need to calculate how far the car travels during the reaction time, and then add that to the
stopping time. It is reasonable to assume that the velocity remains constant during the driver’s reaction time.
1. Identify the knowns and what we want to solve for. We know that ; ; .
We take to be 0. We are looking for .
2. Identify the best equation to use.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 85
2.5 • Motion Equations for Constant Acceleration in One Dimension 67
works well because the only unknown value is , which is what we want to solve for.
3. Plug in the knowns to solve the equation.
2.60
This means the car travels 15.0 m while the driver reacts, making the total displacements in the two cases of dry
and wet concrete 15.0 m greater than if he reacted instantly.
4. Add the displacement during the reaction time to the displacement when braking.
2.61
a. 64.3 m + 15.0 m = 79.3 m when dry
b. 90.0 m + 15.0 m = 105 m when wet
FIGURE2.34The distance necessary to stop a car varies greatly, depending on road conditions and driver reaction time. Shown here are
the braking distances for dry and wet pavement, as calculated in this example, for a car initially traveling at 30.0 m/s. Also shown are the
total distances traveled from the point where the driver first sees a light turn red, assuming a 0.500 s reaction time.
Discussion
The displacements found in this example seem reasonable for stopping a fast-moving car. It should take longer to
stop a car on wet rather than dry pavement. It is interesting that reaction time adds significantly to the
displacements. But more important is the general approach to solving problems. We identify the knowns and the
quantities to be determined and then find an appropriate equation. There is often more than one way to solve a
problem. The various parts of this example can in fact be solved by other methods, but the solutions presented
above are the shortest.
EXAMPLE 2.13
Calculating Time: A Car Merges into Traffic
Suppose a car merges into freeway traffic on a 200-m-long ramp. If its initial velocity is 10.0 m/s and it accelerates
at , how long does it take to travel the 200 m up the ramp? (Such information might be useful to a traffic
engineer.)
Strategy
Draw a sketch.
PAGE: 86
68 2 • Kinematics
FIGURE2.35
We are asked to solve for the time . As before, we identify the known quantities in order to choose a convenient
physical relationship (that is, an equation with one unknown, ).
Solution
1. Identify the knowns and what we want to solve for. We know that ; ; and .
2. We need to solve for . Choose the best equation. works best because the only unknown in
the equation is the variable for which we need to solve.
3. We will need to rearrange the equation to solve for . In this case, it will be easier to plug in the knowns first.
2.62
4. Simplify the equation. The units of meters (m) cancel because they are in each term. We can get the units of
seconds (s) to cancel by taking , where is the magnitude of time and s is the unit. Doing so leaves
2.63
5. Use the quadratic formula to solve for .
(a) Rearrange the equation to get 0 on one side of the equation.
2.64
This is a quadratic equation of the form
2.65
where the constants are .
(b) Its solutions are given by the quadratic formula:
2.66
This yields two solutions for , which are
2.67
In this case, then, the time is in seconds, or
2.68
A negative value for time is unreasonable, since it would mean that the event happened 20 s before the motion
began. We can discard that solution. Thus,
2.69
Discussion
Whenever an equation contains an unknown squared, there will be two solutions. In some problems both solutions
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 87
2.6 • Problem-Solving Basics for One-Dimensional Kinematics 69
are meaningful, but in others, such as the above, only one solution is reasonable. The 10.0 s answer seems
reasonable for a typical freeway on-ramp.
With the basics of kinematics established, we can go on to many other interesting examples and applications. In the
process of developing kinematics, we have also glimpsed a general approach to problem solving that produces both
correct answers and insights into physical relationships.Problem-Solving Basicsdiscusses problem-solving basics
and outlines an approach that will help you succeed in this invaluable task.
Making Connections: Take-Home Experiment—Breaking News
We have been using SI units of meters per second squared to describe some examples of acceleration or
deceleration of cars, runners, and trains. To achieve a better feel for these numbers, one can measure the
braking deceleration of a car doing a slow (and safe) stop. Recall that, for average acceleration, .
While traveling in a car, slowly apply the brakes as you come up to a stop sign. Have a passenger note the initial
speed in miles per hour and the time taken (in seconds) to stop. From this, calculate the deceleration in miles
per hour per second. Convert this to meters per second squared and compare with other decelerations
mentioned in this chapter. Calculate the distance traveled in braking.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
A rocket accelerates at a rate of during launch. How long does it take the rocket to reach a velocity of 400
m/s?
Solution
To answer this, choose an equation that allows you to solve for time , given only , , and .
2.70
Rearrange to solve for .
2.71
2.6 Problem-Solving Basics for One-Dimensional Kinematics
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Apply problem-solving steps and strategies to solve problems of one-dimensional kinematics.
• Apply strategies to determine whether or not the result of a problem is reasonable, and if not, determine
the cause.
FIGURE2.36Problem-solving skills are essential to your success in Physics. (credit: scui3asteveo, Flickr)
Problem-solving skills are obviously essential to success in a quantitative course in physics. More importantly, the
ability to apply broad physical principles, usually represented by equations, to specific situations is a very powerful
PAGE: 88
70 2 • Kinematics
form of knowledge. It is much more powerful than memorizing a list of facts. Analytical skills and problem-solving
abilities can be applied to new situations, whereas a list of facts cannot be made long enough to contain every
possible circumstance. Such analytical skills are useful both for solving problems in this text and for applying
physics in everyday and professional life.
Problem-Solving Steps
While there is no simple step-by-step method that works for every problem, the following general procedures
facilitate problem solving and make it more meaningful. A certain amount of creativity and insight is required as
well.
Step 1
Examine the situation to determine which physical principles are involved. It often helps todraw a simple sketchat
the outset. You will also need to decide which direction is positive and note that on your sketch. Once you have
identified the physical principles, it is much easier to find and apply the equations representing those principles.
Although finding the correct equation is essential, keep in mind that equations represent physical principles, laws of
nature, and relationships among physical quantities. Without a conceptual understanding of a problem, a numerical
solution is meaningless.
Step 2
Make a list of what is given or can be inferred from the problem as stated (identify the knowns). Many problems are
stated very succinctly and require some inspection to determine what is known. A sketch can also be very useful at
this point. Formally identifying the knowns is of particular importance in applying physics to real-world situations.
Remember, “stopped” means velocity is zero, and we often can take initial time and position as zero.
Step 3
Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem (identify the unknowns). In complex problems,
especially, it is not always obvious what needs to be found or in what sequence. Making a list can help.
Step 4
Find an equation or set of equations that can help you solve the problem. Your list of knowns and unknowns can
help here. It is easiest if you can find equations that contain only one unknown—that is, all of the other variables are
known, so you can easily solve for the unknown. If the equation contains more than one unknown, then an
additional equation is needed to solve the problem. In some problems, several unknowns must be determined to
get at the one needed most. In such problems it is especially important to keep physical principles in mind to avoid
going astray in a sea of equations. You may have to use two (or more) different equations to get the final answer.
Step 5
Substitute the knowns along with their units into the appropriate equation, and obtain numerical solutions complete
with units. This step produces the numerical answer; it also provides a check on units that can help you find errors.
If the units of the answer are incorrect, then an error has been made. However, be warned that correct units do not
guarantee that the numerical part of the answer is also correct.
Step 6
Check the answer to see if it is reasonable: Does it make sense?This final step is extremely important—the goal of
physics is to accurately describe nature. To see if the answer is reasonable, check both its magnitude and its sign, in
addition to its units. Your judgment will improve as you solve more and more physics problems, and it will become
possible for you to make finer and finer judgments regarding whether nature is adequately described by the answer
to a problem. This step brings the problem back to its conceptual meaning. If you can judge whether the answer is
reasonable, you have a deeper understanding of physics than just being able to mechanically solve a problem.
When solving problems, we often perform these steps in different order, and we also tend to do several steps
simultaneously. There is no rigid procedure that will work every time. Creativity and insight grow with experience,
and the basics of problem solving become almost automatic. One way to get practice is to work out the text’s
examples for yourself as you read. Another is to work as many end-of-section problems as possible, starting with
the easiest to build confidence and progressing to the more difficult. Once you become involved in physics, you will
see it all around you, and you can begin to apply it to situations you encounter outside the classroom, just as is done
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 89
2.7 • Falling Objects 71
in many of the applications in this text.
Unreasonable Results
Physics must describe nature accurately. Some problems have results that are unreasonable because one premise
is unreasonable or because certain premises are inconsistent with one another. The physical principle applied
correctly then produces an unreasonable result. For example, if a person starting a foot race accelerates at
for 100 s, his final speed will be 40 m/s (about 150 km/h)—clearly unreasonable because the time of 100
s is an unreasonable premise. The physics is correct in a sense, but there is more to describing nature than just
manipulating equations correctly. Checking the result of a problem to see if it is reasonable does more than help
uncover errors in problem solving—it also builds intuition in judging whether nature is being accurately described.
Use the following strategies to determine whether an answer is reasonable and, if it is not, to determine what is the
cause.
Step 1
Solve the problem using strategies as outlined and in the format followed in the worked examples in the text. In the
example given in the preceding paragraph, you would identify the givens as the acceleration and time and use the
equation below to find the unknown final velocity. That is,
2.72
Step 2
Check to see if the answer is reasonable. Is it too large or too small, or does it have the wrong sign, improper units,
…? In this case, you may need to convert meters per second into a more familiar unit, such as miles per hour.
2.73
This velocity is about four times greater than a person can run—so it is too large.
Step 3
If the answer is unreasonable, look for what specifically could cause the identified difficulty. In the example of the
runner, there are only two assumptions that are suspect. The acceleration could be too great or the time too long.
First look at the acceleration and think about what the number means. If someone accelerates at , their
velocity is increasing by 0.4 m/s each second. Does this seem reasonable? If so, the time must be too long. It is not
possible for someone to accelerate at a constant rate of for 100 s (almost two minutes).
2.7 Falling Objects
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the effects of gravity on objects in motion.
• Describe the motion of objects that are in free fall.
• Calculate the position and velocity of objects in free fall.
Falling objects form an interesting class of motion problems. For example, we can estimate the depth of a vertical
mine shaft by dropping a rock into it and listening for the rock to hit the bottom. By applying the kinematics
developed so far to falling objects, we can examine some interesting situations and learn much about gravity in the
process.
Gravity
The most remarkable and unexpected fact about falling objects is that, if air resistance and friction are negligible,
then in a given location all objects fall toward the center of Earth with thesame constant acceleration,independent
of their mass. This experimentally determined fact is unexpected, because we are so accustomed to the effects of
air resistance and friction that we expect light objects to fall slower than heavy ones.
PAGE: 90
72 2 • Kinematics
FIGURE2.37A hammer and a feather will fall with the same constant acceleration if air resistance is considered negligible. This is a
general characteristic of gravity not unique to Earth, as astronaut David R. Scott demonstrated on the Moon in 1971, where the acceleration
due to gravity is only .
In the real world, air resistance can cause a lighter object to fall slower than a heavier object of the same size. A
tennis ball will reach the ground after a hard baseball dropped at the same time. (It might be difficult to observe the
difference if the height is not large.) Air resistance opposes the motion of an object through the air, while friction
between objects—such as between clothes and a laundry chute or between a stone and a pool into which it is
dropped—also opposes motion between them. For the ideal situations of these first few chapters, an objectfalling
without air resistance or frictionis defined to be infree-fall.
The force of gravity causes objects to fall toward the center of Earth. The acceleration of free-falling objects is
therefore called theacceleration due to gravity. The acceleration due to gravity isconstant, which means we can
apply the kinematics equations to any falling object where air resistance and friction are negligible. This opens a
broad class of interesting situations to us. The acceleration due to gravity is so important that its magnitude is given
its own symbol, . It is constant at any given location on Earth and has the average value
2.74
Although varies from to , depending on latitude, altitude, underlying geological formations,
and local topography, the average value of will be used in this text unless otherwise specified. The
direction of the acceleration due to gravity isdownward (towards the center of Earth). In fact, its directiondefines
what we call vertical. Note that whether the acceleration in the kinematic equations has the value or
depends on how we define our coordinate system. If we define the upward direction as positive, then
, and if we define the downward direction as positive, then .
One-Dimensional Motion Involving Gravity
The best way to see the basic features of motion involving gravity is to start with the simplest situations and then
progress toward more complex ones. So we start by considering straight up and down motion with no air resistance
or friction. These assumptions mean that the velocity (if there is any) is vertical. If the object is dropped, we know
the initial velocity is zero. Once the object has left contact with whatever held or threw it, the object is in free-fall.
Under these circumstances, the motion is one-dimensional and has constant acceleration of magnitude . We will
also represent vertical displacement with the symbol and use for horizontal displacement.
Kinematic Equations for Objects in Free-Fall where Acceleration = -g
2.75
2.76
2.77
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 91
2.7 • Falling Objects 73
EXAMPLE 2.14
Calculating Position and Velocity of a Falling Object: A Rock Thrown Upward
A person standing on the edge of a high cliff throws a rock straight up with an initial velocity of 13.0 m/s.The rock
misses the edge of the cliff as it falls back to earth. Calculate the position and velocity of the rock 1.00 s, 2.00 s, and
3.00 s after it is thrown, neglecting the effects of air resistance.
Strategy
Draw a sketch.
FIGURE2.38
We are asked to determine the position at various times. It is reasonable to take the initial position to be zero.
This problem involves one-dimensional motion in the vertical direction. We use plus and minus signs to indicate
direction, with up being positive and down negative. Since up is positive, and the rock is thrown upward, the initial
velocity must be positive too. The acceleration due to gravity is downward, so is negative. It is crucial that the
initial velocity and the acceleration due to gravity have opposite signs. Opposite signs indicate that the acceleration
due to gravity opposes the initial motion and will slow and eventually reverse it.
Since we are asked for values of position and velocity at three times, we will refer to these as and ; and ;
and and .
Solution for Position
1. Identify the knowns. We know that ; ; ; and .
2. Identify the best equation to use. We will use because it includes only one unknown, (or
, here), which is the value we want to find.
3. Plug in the known values and solve for .
2.78
Discussion
The rock is 8.10 m above its starting point at s, since . It could bemovingup or down; the only way
to tell is to calculate and find out if it is positive or negative.
Solution for Velocity
1. Identify the knowns. We know that ; ; ; and . We also know
from the solution above that .
2. Identify the best equation to use. The most straightforward is (from , where
).
3. Plug in the knowns and solve.
2.79
PAGE: 92
74 2 • Kinematics
Discussion
The positive value for means that the rock is still heading upward at . However, it has slowed from its
original 13.0 m/s, as expected.
Solution for Remaining Times
The procedures for calculating the position and velocity at and are the same as those above. The
results are summarized inTable 2.1and illustrated inFigure 2.39.
Time,t Position,y Velocity,v Acceleration,a
TABLE2.1Results
Graphing the data helps us understand it more clearly.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 93
2.7 • Falling Objects 75
FIGURE2.39Vertical position, vertical velocity, and vertical acceleration vs. time for a rock thrown vertically up at the edge of a cliff. Notice
that velocity changes linearly with time and that acceleration is constant.Misconception Alert!Notice that the position vs. time graph shows
vertical position only. It is easy to get the impression that the graph shows some horizontal motion—the shape of the graph looks like the
path of a projectile. But this is not the case; the horizontal axis istime, not space. The actual path of the rock in space is straight up, and
straight down.
Discussion
The interpretation of these results is important. At 1.00 s the rock is above its starting point and heading upward,
since and are both positive. At 2.00 s, the rock is still above its starting point, but the negative velocity means
it is moving downward. At 3.00 s, both and are negative, meaning the rock is below its starting point and
continuing to move downward. Notice that when the rock is at its highest point (at 1.5 s), its velocity is zero, but its
acceleration is still . Its acceleration is for the whole trip—while it is moving up and while it
is moving down. Note that the values for are the positions (or displacements) of the rock, not the total distances
traveled. Finally, note that free-fall applies to upward motion as well as downward. Both have the same
acceleration—the acceleration due to gravity, which remains constant the entire time. Astronauts training in the
famous Vomit Comet, for example, experience free-fall while arcing up as well as down, as we will discuss in more
detail later.
PAGE: 94
76 2 • Kinematics
Making Connections: Take-Home Experiment—Reaction Time
A simple experiment can be done to determine your reaction time. Have a friend hold a ruler between your
thumb and index finger, separated by about 1 cm. Note the mark on the ruler that is right between your fingers.
Have your friend drop the ruler unexpectedly, and try to catch it between your two fingers. Note the new reading
on the ruler. Assuming acceleration is that due to gravity, calculate your reaction time. How far would you travel
in a car (moving at 30 m/s) if the time it took your foot to go from the gas pedal to the brake was twice this
reaction time?
EXAMPLE 2.15
Calculating Velocity of a Falling Object: A Rock Thrown Down
What happens if the person on the cliff throws the rock straight down, instead of straight up? To explore this
question, calculate the velocity of the rock when it is 5.10 m below the starting point, and has been thrown
downward with an initial speed of 13.0 m/s.
Strategy
Draw a sketch.
FIGURE2.40
Since up is positive, the final position of the rock will be negative because it finishes below the starting point at
. Similarly, the initial velocity is downward and therefore negative, as is the acceleration due to gravity. We
expect the final velocity to be negative since the rock will continue to move downward.
Solution
1. Identify the knowns. ; ; ; .
2. Choose the kinematic equation that makes it easiest to solve the problem. The equation
works well because the only unknown in it is . (We will plug in for .)
3. Enter the known values
2.80
where we have retained extra significant figures because this is an intermediate result.
Taking the square root, and noting that a square root can be positive or negative, gives
2.81
The negative root is chosen to indicate that the rock is still heading down. Thus,
2.82
Discussion
Note thatthis is exactly the same velocity the rock had at this position when it was thrown straight upward with the
same initial speed. (SeeExample 2.14andFigure 2.41(a).) This is not a coincidental result. Because we only
consider the acceleration due to gravity in this problem, thespeedof a falling object depends only on its initial
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 95
2.7 • Falling Objects 77
speed and its vertical position relative to the starting point. For example, if the velocity of the rock is calculated at a
height of 8.10 m above the starting point (using the method fromExample 2.14) when the initial velocity is 13.0 m/s
straight up, a result of is obtained. Here both signs are meaningful; the positive value occurs when the
rock is at 8.10 m and heading up, and the negative value occurs when the rock is at 8.10 m and heading back down.
It has the samespeedbut the opposite direction.
FIGURE2.41(a) A person throws a rock straight up, as explored inExample 2.14. The arrows are velocity vectors at 0, 1.00, 2.00, and 3.00
s. (b) A person throws a rock straight down from a cliff with the same initial speed as before, as inExample 2.15. Note that at the same
distance below the point of release, the rock has the same velocity in both cases.
Another way to look at it is this: InExample 2.14, the rock is thrown up with an initial velocity of . It rises
and then falls back down. When its position is on its way back down, its velocity is . That is, it has
the same speed on its way down as on its way up. We would then expect its velocity at a position of to
be the same whether we have thrown it upwards at or thrown it downwards at . The velocity of
the rock on its way down from is the same whether we have thrown it up or down to start with, as long as the
speed with which it was initially thrown is the same.
PAGE: 96
78 2 • Kinematics
EXAMPLE 2.16
Findgfrom Data on a Falling Object
The acceleration due to gravity on Earth differs slightly from place to place, depending on topography (e.g., whether
you are on a hill or in a valley) and subsurface geology (whether there is dense rock like iron ore as opposed to light
rock like salt beneath you.) The precise acceleration due to gravity can be calculated from data taken in an
introductory physics laboratory course. An object, usually a metal ball for which air resistance is negligible, is
dropped and the time it takes to fall a known distance is measured. See, for example,Figure 2.42. Very precise
results can be produced with this method if sufficient care is taken in measuring the distance fallen and the elapsed
time.
FIGURE2.42Positions and velocities of a metal ball released from rest when air resistance is negligible. Velocity is seen to increase linearly
with time while displacement increases with time squared. Acceleration is a constant and is equal to gravitational acceleration.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 97
2.7 • Falling Objects 79
Suppose the ball falls 1.0000 m in 0.45173 s. Assuming the ball is not affected by air resistance, what is the precise
acceleration due to gravity at this location?
Strategy
Draw a sketch.
FIGURE2.43
We need to solve for acceleration . Note that in this case, displacement is downward and therefore negative, as is
acceleration.
Solution
1. Identify the knowns. ; ; ; .
2. Choose the equation that allows you to solve for using the known values.
2.83
3. Substitute 0 for and rearrange the equation to solve for . Substituting 0 for yields
2.84
Solving for gives
2.85
4. Substitute known values yields
2.86
so, because with the directions we have chosen,
2.87
Discussion
The negative value for indicates that the gravitational acceleration is downward, as expected. We expect the value
to be somewhere around the average value of , so makes sense. Since the data going into
the calculation are relatively precise, this value for is more precise than the average value of ; it
represents the local value for the acceleration due to gravity.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
A chunk of ice breaks off a glacier and falls 30.0 meters before it hits the water. Assuming it falls freely (there is no
air resistance), how long does it take to hit the water?
Solution
We know that initial position , final position , and . We can then use the
equation to solve for . Inserting , we obtain
PAGE: 98
80 2 • Kinematics
2.88
where we take the positive value as the physically relevant answer. Thus, it takes about 2.5 seconds for the piece of
ice to hit the water.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Equation Grapher
Learn about graphing polynomials. The shape of the curve changes as the constants are adjusted. View the curves
for the individual terms (e.g. ) to see how they add to generate the polynomial curve.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/2-7-falling-objects)
2.8 Graphical Analysis of One-Dimensional Motion
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe a straight-line graph in terms of its slope andy-intercept.
• Determine average velocity or instantaneous velocity from a graph of position vs. time.
• Determine average or instantaneous acceleration from a graph of velocity vs. time.
• Derive a graph of velocity vs. time from a graph of position vs. time.
• Derive a graph of acceleration vs. time from a graph of velocity vs. time.
A graph, like a picture, is worth a thousand words. Graphs not only contain numerical information; they also reveal
relationships between physical quantities. This section uses graphs of position, velocity, and acceleration versus
time to illustrate one-dimensional kinematics.
Slopes and General Relationships
First note that graphs in this text have perpendicular axes, one horizontal and the other vertical. When two physical
quantities are plotted against one another in such a graph, the horizontal axis is usually considered to be an
independent variableand the vertical axis adependent variable. If we call the horizontal axis the -axis and the
vertical axis the -axis, as inFigure 2.44, a straight-line graph has the general form
2.89
Here is theslope, defined to be the rise divided by the run (as seen in the figure) of the straight line. The letter is
used for they-intercept, which is the point at which the line crosses the vertical axis.
FIGURE2.44A straight-line graph. The equation for a straight line is .
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 99
2.8 • Graphical Analysis of One-Dimensional Motion 81
Graph of Position vs. Time (a= 0, sovis constant)
Time is usually an independent variable that other quantities, such as position, depend upon. A graph of position
versus time would, thus, have on the vertical axis and on the horizontal axis.Figure 2.45is just such a straight-
line graph. It shows a graph of position versus time for a jet-powered car on a very flat dry lake bed in Nevada.
FIGURE2.45Graph of position versus time for a jet-powered car on the Bonneville Salt Flats.
Using the relationship between dependent and independent variables, we see that the slope in the graph above is
average velocity and the intercept is position at time zero—that is, . Substituting these symbols into
gives
2.90
or
2.91
Thus a graph of position versus time gives a general relationship among displacement(change in position), velocity,
and time, as well as giving detailed numerical information about a specific situation.
The Slope ofxvs.t
The slope of the graph of position vs. time is velocity .
2.92
Notice that this equation is the same as that derived algebraically from other motion equations inMotion
Equations for Constant Acceleration in One Dimension.
From the figure we can see that the car has a position of 525 m at 0.50 s and 2000 m at 6.40 s. Its position at other
times can be read from the graph; furthermore, information about its velocity and acceleration can also be obtained
from the graph.
EXAMPLE 2.17
Determining Average Velocity from a Graph of Position versus Time: Jet Car
Find the average velocity of the car whose position is graphed inFigure 2.45.
Strategy
The slope of a graph of vs. is average velocity, since slope equals rise over run. In this case, rise = change in
position and run = change in time, so that
PAGE: 100
82 2 • Kinematics
2.93
Since the slope is constant here, any two points on the graph can be used to find the slope. (Generally speaking, it is
most accurate to use two widely separated points on the straight line. This is because any error in reading data from
the graph is proportionally smaller if the interval is larger.)
Solution
1. Choose two points on the line. In this case, we choose the points labeled on the graph: (6.4 s, 2000 m) and (0.50
s, 525 m). (Note, however, that you could choose any two points.)
2. Substitute the and values of the chosen points into the equation. Remember in calculating change we
always use final value minus initial value.
2.94
yielding
2.95
Discussion
This is an impressively large land speed (900 km/h, or about 560 mi/h): much greater than the typical highway
speed limit of 60 mi/h (27 m/s or 96 km/h), but considerably shy of the record of 343 m/s (1234 km/h or 766 mi/h)
set in 1997.
Graphs of Motion when is constant but
The graphs inFigure 2.46below represent the motion of the jet-powered car as it accelerates toward its top speed,
but only during the time when its acceleration is constant. Time starts at zero for this motion (as if measured with a
stopwatch), and the position and velocity are initially 200 m and 15 m/s, respectively.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 101
2.8 • Graphical Analysis of One-Dimensional Motion 83
FIGURE2.46Graphs of motion of a jet-powered car during the time span when its acceleration is constant. (a) The slope of an vs. graph
is velocity. This is shown at two points, and the instantaneous velocities obtained are plotted in the next graph. Instantaneous velocity at
any point is the slope of the tangent at that point. (b) The slope of the vs. graph is constant for this part of the motion, indicating
constant acceleration. (c) Acceleration has the constant value of over the time interval plotted.
PAGE: 102
84 2 • Kinematics
FIGURE2.47A U.S. Air Force jet car speeds down a track. (credit: Matt Trostle, Flickr)
The graph of position versus time inFigure 2.46(a) is a curve rather than a straight line. The slope of the curve
becomes steeper as time progresses, showing that the velocity is increasing over time. The slope at any point on a
position-versus-time graph is the instantaneous velocity at that point. It is found by drawing a straight line tangent
to the curve at the point of interest and taking the slope of this straight line. Tangent lines are shown for two points
inFigure 2.46(a). If this is done at every point on the curve and the values are plotted against time, then the graph of
velocity versus time shown inFigure 2.46(b) is obtained. Furthermore, the slope of the graph of velocity versus time
is acceleration, which is shown inFigure 2.46(c).
EXAMPLE 2.18
Determining Instantaneous Velocity from the Slope at a Point: Jet Car
Calculate the velocity of the jet car at a time of 25 s by finding the slope of the vs. graph in the graph below.
FIGURE2.48The slope of an vs. graph is velocity. This is shown at two points. Instantaneous velocity at any point is the slope of the
tangent at that point.
Strategy
The slope of a curve at a point is equal to the slope of a straight line tangent to the curve at that point. This principle
is illustrated inFigure 2.48, where Q is the point at .
Solution
1. Find the tangent line to the curve at .
2. Determine the endpoints of the tangent. These correspond to a position of 1300 m at time 19 s and a position of
3120 m at time 32 s.
3. Plug these endpoints into the equation to solve for the slope, .
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 103
2.8 • Graphical Analysis of One-Dimensional Motion 85
2.96
Thus,
2.97
Discussion
This is the value given in this figure’s table for at . The value of 140 m/s for is plotted inFigure 2.48.
The entire graph of vs. can be obtained in this fashion.
Carrying this one step further, we note that the slope of a velocity versus time graph is acceleration. Slope is rise
divided by run; on a vs. graph, rise = change in velocity and run = change in time .
The Slope ofvvs.t
The slope of a graph of velocity vs. time is acceleration .
2.98
Since the velocity versus time graph inFigure 2.46(b) is a straight line, its slope is the same everywhere, implying
that acceleration is constant. Acceleration versus time is graphed inFigure 2.46(c).
Additional general information can be obtained fromFigure 2.48and the expression for a straight line, .
In this case, the vertical axis is , the intercept is , the slope is , and the horizontal axis is . Substituting
these symbols yields
2.99
A general relationship for velocity, acceleration, and time has again been obtained from a graph. Notice that this
equation was also derived algebraically from other motion equations inMotion Equations for Constant Acceleration
in One Dimension.
It is not accidental that the same equations are obtained by graphical analysis as by algebraic techniques. In fact, an
important way todiscoverphysical relationships is to measure various physical quantities and then make graphs of
one quantity against another to see if they are correlated in any way. Correlations imply physical relationships and
might be shown by smooth graphs such as those above. From such graphs, mathematical relationships can
sometimes be postulated. Further experiments are then performed to determine the validity of the hypothesized
relationships.
Graphs of Motion Where Acceleration is Not Constant
Now consider the motion of the jet car as it goes from 165 m/s to its top velocity of 250 m/s, graphed inFigure 2.49.
Time again starts at zero, and the initial velocity is 165 m/s. (This was the final velocity of the car in the motion
graphed inFigure 2.46.) Acceleration gradually decreases from to zero when the car hits 250 m/s. The
velocity increases until 55 s and then becomes constant, since acceleration decreases to zero at 55 s and remains
zero afterward.
PAGE: 104
86 2 • Kinematics
FIGURE2.49Graphs of motion of a jet-powered car as it reaches its top velocity. This motion begins where the motion inFigure 2.46ends.
(a) The velocity gradually approaches its top value. The slope of this graph is acceleration. It is plotted in the final graph. (b) Acceleration
gradually declines to zero when velocity becomes constant. Notice in each of the three graphs that the acceleration drops down to zero and
the velocity levels out. This results in a position-time graph that is almost linear. A close-up of the position time graph would show a slight
curvature, as indicated in the velocity graph.
EXAMPLE 2.19
Calculating Acceleration from a Graph of Velocity versus Time
Calculate the acceleration of the jet car at a time of 25 s by finding the slope of the vs. graph inFigure 2.49(a).
Strategy
The slope of the curve at is equal to the slope of the line tangent at that point, as illustrated inFigure
2.49(a).
Solution
Determine endpoints of the tangent line from the figure, and then plug them into the equation to solve for slope, .
2.100
2.101
Discussion
Note that this value for is consistent with the value plotted inFigure 2.49(b) at .
A graph of position versus time can be used to generate a graph of velocity versus time, and a graph of velocity
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 105
2.8 • Graphical Analysis of One-Dimensional Motion 87
versus time can be used to generate a graph of acceleration versus time. We do this by finding the slope of the
graphs at every point. If the graph is linear (i.e., a line with a constant slope), it is easy to find the slope at any point
and you have the slope for every point. Graphical analysis of motion can be used to describe both specific and
general characteristics of kinematics. Graphs can also be used for other topics in physics. An important aspect of
exploring physical relationships is to graph them and look for underlying relationships.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
A graph of velocity vs. time of a ship coming into a harbor is shown below. (a) Describe the motion of the ship based
on the graph. (b)What would a graph of the ship’s acceleration look like?
FIGURE2.50
Solution
(a) The ship moves at constant velocity and then begins to decelerate at a constant rate. At some point, its
deceleration rate decreases. It maintains this lower deceleration rate until it stops moving.
(b) A graph of acceleration vs. time would show zero acceleration in the first leg, large and constant negative
acceleration in the second leg, and constant negative acceleration.
FIGURE2.51
PAGE: 106
88 2 • Glossary
Glossary
acceleration the rate of change in velocity; the dependent variable is measured with respect to;
change in velocity over time usually plotted along the -axis
acceleration due to gravity acceleration of an object instantaneous acceleration acceleration at a specific
as a result of gravity point in time
average acceleration the change in velocity divided instantaneous speed magnitude of the
by the time over which it changes instantaneous velocity
average speed distance traveled divided by time instantaneous velocity velocity at a specific instant,
during which motion occurs or the average velocity over an infinitesimal time
average velocity displacement divided by time over interval
which displacement occurs kinematics the study of motion without considering
deceleration acceleration in the direction opposite to its causes
velocity; acceleration that results in a decrease in model simplified description that contains only those
velocity elements necessary to describe the physics of a
dependent variable the variable that is being physical situation
measured; usually plotted along the -axis position the location of an object at a particular time
displacement the change in position of an object scalar a quantity that is described by magnitude, but
distance the magnitude of displacement between not direction
two positions slope the difference in -value (the rise) divided by
distance traveled the total length of the path the difference in -value (the run) of two points on a
traveled between two positions straight line
elapsed time the difference between the ending time time change, or the interval over which change occurs
and beginning time vector a quantity that is described by both magnitude
free-fall the state of movement that results from and direction
gravitational force only y-intercept the value when = 0, or when the
independent variable the variable that the graph crosses the -axis
Section Summary
2.1Displacement 2.2Vectors, Scalars, and Coordinate
Systems
• Kinematics is the study of motion without
considering its causes. In this chapter, it is limited • A vector is any quantity that has magnitude and
to motion along a straight line, called one- direction.
dimensional motion. • A scalar is any quantity that has magnitude but no
• Displacement is the change in position of an direction.
object. • Displacement and velocity are vectors, whereas
• In symbols, displacement is defined to be distance and speed are scalars.
• In one-dimensional motion, direction is specified
where is the initial position and is the final by a plus or minus sign to signify left or right, up or
position. In this text, the Greek letter (delta) down, and the like.
always means “change in” whatever quantity
2.3Time, Velocity, and Speed
follows it. The SI unit for displacement is the
meter (m). Displacement has a direction as well as • Time is measured in terms of change, and its SI
a magnitude. unit is the second (s). Elapsed time for an event is
• When you start a problem, assign which direction
will be positive. where is the final time and is the initial time.
• Distance is the magnitude of displacement The initial time is often taken to be zero, as if
between two positions. measured with a stopwatch; the elapsed time is
• Distance traveled is the total length of the path then just .
traveled between two positions. • Average velocity is defined as displacement
divided by the travel time. In symbols, average
velocity is
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 107
2 • Section Summary 89
2.6Problem-Solving Basics for One-
Dimensional Kinematics
• The SI unit for velocity is m/s.
• The six basic problem solving steps for physics
• Velocity is a vector and thus has a direction.
are:
• Instantaneous velocity is the velocity at a
Step 1. Examine the situation to determine which
specific instant or the average velocity for an
physical principles are involved.
infinitesimal interval.
• Instantaneous speed is the magnitude of the Step 2. Make a list of what is given or can be
instantaneous velocity. inferred from the problem as stated (identify the
• Instantaneous speed is a scalar quantity, as it has knowns).
no direction specified.
Step 3. Identify exactly what needs to be
• Average speed is the total distance traveled
determined in the problem (identify the
divided by the elapsed time. (Average speed isnot
unknowns).
the magnitude of the average velocity.) Speed is a
scalar quantity; it has no direction associated with Step 4. Find an equation or set of equations that
it. can help you solve the problem.
2.4Acceleration
Step 5. Substitute the knowns along with their
units into the appropriate equation, and obtain
• Acceleration is the rate at which velocity changes.
numerical solutions complete with units.
In symbols,average acceleration is
Step 6. Check the answer to see if it is reasonable:
Does it make sense?
• The SI unit for acceleration is .
2.7Falling Objects
• Acceleration is a vector, and thus has a both a
magnitude and direction. • An object in free-fall experiences constant
• Acceleration can be caused by either a change in acceleration if air resistance is negligible.
the magnitude or the direction of the velocity. • On Earth, all free-falling objects have an
• Instantaneous acceleration is the acceleration at acceleration due to gravity , which averages
a specific instant in time.
• Deceleration is an acceleration with a direction
• Whether the accelerationashould be taken as
opposite to that of the velocity.
or is determined by your choice of coordinate
2.5Motion Equations for Constant system. If you choose the upward direction as
Acceleration in One Dimension positive, is negative. In the
opposite case, is positive.
• To simplify calculations we take acceleration to be Since acceleration is constant, the kinematic
constant, so that at all times. equations above can be applied with the
• We also take initial time to be zero. appropriate or substituted for .
• Initial position and velocity are given a subscript 0; • For objects in free-fall, up is normally taken as
final values have no subscript. Thus, positive for displacement, velocity, and
acceleration.
2.8Graphical Analysis of One-Dimensional
Motion
• The following kinematic equations for motion with
constant are useful: • Graphs of motion can be used to analyze motion.
• Graphical solutions yield identical solutions to
mathematical methods for deriving motion
equations.
• The slope of a graph of displacement vs. time is
velocity .
• The slope of a graph of velocity vs. time graph
is acceleration .
• In vertical motion, is substituted for .
• Average velocity, instantaneous velocity, and
acceleration can all be obtained by analyzing
PAGE: 108
90 2 • Conceptual Questions
graphs.
Conceptual Questions
2.1Displacement 12. How are instantaneous velocity and instantaneous
speed related to one another? How do they differ?
1. Give an example in which there are clear
distinctions among distance traveled,
2.4Acceleration
displacement, and magnitude of displacement.
Specifically identify each quantity in your example. 13. Is it possible for speed to be constant while
2. Under what circumstances does distance traveled acceleration is not zero? Give an example of such
equal magnitude of displacement? What is the only a situation.
case in which magnitude of displacement and 14. Is it possible for velocity to be constant while
displacement are exactly the same? acceleration is not zero? Explain.
3. Bacteria move back and forth by using their flagella 15. Give an example in which velocity is zero yet
(structures that look like little tails). Speeds of up to acceleration is not.
have been observed. 16. If a subway train is moving to the left (has a
The total distance traveled by a bacterium is large negative velocity) and then comes to a stop, what
for its size, while its displacement is small. Why is is the direction of its acceleration? Is the
this? acceleration positive or negative?
17. Plus and minus signs are used in one-dimensional
2.2Vectors, Scalars, and Coordinate motion to indicate direction. What is the sign of an
Systems acceleration that reduces the magnitude of a
negative velocity? Of a positive velocity?
4. A student writes, “A bird that is diving for prey has a
speed of .” What is wrong with the 2.6Problem-Solving Basics for One-
student’s statement? What has the student actually Dimensional Kinematics
described? Explain.
5. What is the speed of the bird inExercise 2.4? 18. What information do you need in order to choose
6. Acceleration is the change in velocity over time. which equation or equations to use to solve a
Given this information, is acceleration a vector or a problem? Explain.
scalar quantity? Explain. 19. What is the last thing you should do when solving
7. A weather forecast states that the temperature is a problem? Explain.
predicted to be the following day. Is this
temperature a vector or a scalar quantity? Explain. 2.7Falling Objects
20. What is the acceleration of a rock thrown straight
2.3Time, Velocity, and Speed
upward on the way up? At the top of its flight? On
8. Give an example (but not one from the text) of a the way down?
device used to measure time and identify what 21. An object that is thrown straight up falls back to
change in that device indicates a change in time. Earth. This is one-dimensional motion. (a) When is
9. There is a distinction between average speed and its velocity zero? (b) Does its velocity change
the magnitude of average velocity. Give an example direction? (c) Does the acceleration due to gravity
that illustrates the difference between these two have the same sign on the way up as on the way
quantities. down?
10. Does a car’s odometer measure distance traveled 22. Suppose you throw a rock nearly straight up at a
or displacement? Does its speedometer measure coconut in a palm tree, and the rock misses on the
speed or velocity? way up but hits the coconut on the way down.
11. If you divide the total distance traveled on a car Neglecting air resistance, how does the speed of
trip (as determined by the odometer) by the time the rock when it hits the coconut on the way down
for the trip, are you calculating the average speed compare with what it would have been if it had hit
or the magnitude of the average velocity? Under the coconut on the way up? Is it more likely to
what circumstances are these two quantities the dislodge the coconut on the way up or down?
same? Explain.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 109
2 • Conceptual Questions 91
23. If an object is thrown straight up and air 27. (a) Sketch a graph of velocity versus time
resistance is negligible, then its speed when it corresponding to the graph of position versus time
returns to the starting point is the same as when it given inFigure 2.53. (b) Identify the time or times ( ,
was released. If air resistance were not negligible, , , etc.) at which the instantaneous velocity is
how would its speed upon return compare with its greatest. (c) At which times is it zero? (d) At which
initial speed? How would the maximum height to times is it negative?
which it rises be affected?
24. The severity of a fall depends on your speed when
you strike the ground. All factors but the
acceleration due to gravity being the same, how
many times higher could a safe fall on the Moon
be than on Earth (gravitational acceleration on the
Moon is about 1/6 that of the Earth)?
25. How many times higher could an astronaut jump
on the Moon than on Earth if his takeoff speed is
the same in both locations (gravitational
acceleration on the Moon is about 1/6 of on
Earth)?
2.8Graphical Analysis of One-Dimensional
Motion
FIGURE2.53
26. (a) Explain how you can use the graph of position
28. (a) Explain how you can determine the acceleration
versus time inFigure 2.52to describe the change in
over time from a velocity versus time graph such as the
velocity over time. Identify (b) the time ( , , , , or
one inFigure 2.54. (b) Based on the graph, how does
) at which the instantaneous velocity is greatest, (c)
acceleration change over time?
the time at which it is zero, and (d) the time at which it
is negative.
FIGURE2.54
FIGURE2.52
PAGE: 110
92 2 • Problems & Exercises
29. (a) Sketch a graph of acceleration versus time 30. Consider the velocity vs. time graph of a person in an
corresponding to the graph of velocity versus time elevator shown inFigure 2.56. Suppose the elevator is
given inFigure 2.55. (b) Identify the time or times ( , initially at rest. It then accelerates for 3 seconds,
, , etc.) at which the acceleration is greatest. (c) At maintains that velocity for 15 seconds, then
which times is it zero? (d) At which times is it negative? decelerates for 5 seconds until it stops. The
acceleration for the entire trip is not constant so we
cannot use the equations of motion fromMotion
Equations for Constant Acceleration in One Dimension
for the complete trip. (We could, however, use them in
the three individual sections where acceleration is a
constant.) Sketch graphs of (a) position vs. time and (b)
acceleration vs. time for this trip.
FIGURE2.55
FIGURE2.56
31. A cylinder is given a push and then rolls up an
inclined plane. If the origin is the starting point,
sketch the position, velocity, and acceleration of
the cylinder vs. time as it goes up and then down
the plane.
Problems & Exercises
2.1Displacement 2. Find the following for path B inFigure 2.57: (a) The
distance traveled. (b) The magnitude of the
displacement from start to finish. (c) The
displacement from start to finish.
3. Find the following for path C inFigure 2.57: (a) The
distance traveled. (b) The magnitude of the
displacement from start to finish. (c) The
displacement from start to finish.
4. Find the following for path D inFigure 2.57: (a) The
distance traveled. (b) The magnitude of the
displacement from start to finish. (c) The
displacement from start to finish.
FIGURE2.57 2.3Time, Velocity, and Speed
1. Find the following for path A inFigure 2.57: (a) The
5. (a) Calculate Earth’s average speed relative to the
distance traveled. (b) The magnitude of the
Sun. (b) What is its average velocity over a period of
displacement from start to finish. (c) The
one year?
displacement from start to finish.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 111
2 • Problems & Exercises 93
6. A helicopter blade spins at exactly 100 revolutions 13. Conversations with astronauts on the lunar
per minute. Its tip is 5.00 m from the center of surface were characterized by a kind of echo in
rotation. (a) Calculate the average speed of the which the earthbound person’s voice was so loud
blade tip in the helicopter’s frame of reference. (b) in the astronaut’s space helmet that it was picked
What is its average velocity over one revolution? up by the astronaut’s microphone and transmitted
7. The North American and European continents are back to Earth. It is reasonable to assume that the
moving apart at a rate of about 3 cm/y. At this rate echo time equals the time necessary for the radio
how long will it take them to drift 500 km farther wave to travel from the Earth to the Moon and
apart than they are at present? back (that is, neglecting any time delays in the
8. Land west of the San Andreas fault in southern electronic equipment). Calculate the distance
California is moving at an average velocity of about from Earth to the Moon given that the echo time
6 cm/y northwest relative to land east of the fault. was 2.56 s and that radio waves travel at the
Los Angeles is west of the fault and may thus speed of light .
someday be at the same latitude as San Francisco, 14. A football quarterback runs 15.0 m straight down
which is east of the fault. How far in the future will the playing field in 2.50 s. He is then hit and
this occur if the displacement to be made is 590 km pushed 3.00 m straight backward in 1.75 s. He
northwest, assuming the motion remains constant? breaks the tackle and runs straight forward
9. On May 26, 1934, a streamlined, stainless steel another 21.0 m in 5.20 s. Calculate his average
diesel train called the Zephyr set the world’s velocity (a) for each of the three intervals and (b)
nonstop long-distance speed record for trains. Its for the entire motion.
run from Denver to Chicago took 13 hours, 4 15. The planetary model of the atom pictures
minutes, 58 seconds, and was witnessed by more electrons orbiting the atomic nucleus much as
than a million people along the route. The total planets orbit the Sun. In this model you can view
distance traveled was 1633.8 km. What was its hydrogen, the simplest atom, as having a single
average speed in km/h and m/s? electron in a circular orbit in
10. Tidal friction is slowing the rotation of the Earth. diameter. (a) If the average speed of the electron
As a result, the orbit of the Moon is increasing in in this orbit is known to be ,
radius at a rate of approximately 4 cm/year. calculate the number of revolutions per second it
Assuming this to be a constant rate, how many makes about the nucleus. (b) What is the
years will pass before the radius of the Moon’s electron’s average velocity per revolution?
orbit increases by (1%)?
11. A student drove to the university from their home 2.4Acceleration
and noted that the odometer reading of their car
16. A cheetah can accelerate from rest to a speed of
increased by 12.0 km. The trip took 18.0 min. (a)
30.0 m/s in 7.00 s. What is its acceleration?
What was their average speed? (b) If the straight-
17. Professional Application
line distance from their home to the university is
Dr. John Paul Stapp was U.S. Air Force officer who
10.3 km in a direction south of east, what
studied the effects of extreme deceleration on the
was their average velocity? (c) If they returned
human body. On December 10, 1954, Stapp rode
home by the same path 7 h 30 min after they left,
a rocket sled, accelerating from rest to a top
what were their average speed and velocity for the
speed of 282 m/s (1015 km/h) in 5.00 s, and was
entire trip?
brought jarringly back to rest in only 1.40 s!
12. The speed of propagation of the action potential
Calculate his (a) acceleration and (b) deceleration.
(an electrical signal) in a nerve cell depends
Express each in multiples of by
(inversely) on the diameter of the axon (nerve
taking its ratio to the acceleration of gravity.
fiber). If the nerve cell connecting the spinal cord
18. A commuter backs her car out of her garage with
to your feet is 1.1 m long, and the nerve impulse
an acceleration of . (a) How long does it
speed is 18 m/s, how long does it take for the
take her to reach a speed of 2.00 m/s? (b) If she
nerve signal to travel this distance?
then brakes to a stop in 0.800 s, what is her
deceleration?
PAGE: 112
94 2 • Problems & Exercises
19. Assume that an intercontinental ballistic missile 26. Professional Application:
goes from rest to a suborbital speed of 6.50 km/s Blood is accelerated from rest to 30.0 cm/s in a
in 60.0 s (the actual speed and time are distance of 1.80 cm by the left ventricle of the
classified). What is its average acceleration in heart. (a) Make a sketch of the situation. (b) List
and in multiples of the knowns in this problem. (c) How long does the
acceleration take? To solve this part, first identify
2.5Motion Equations for Constant the unknown, and then discuss how you chose the
Acceleration in One Dimension appropriate equation to solve for it. After choosing
the equation, show your steps in solving for the
20. An Olympic-class sprinter starts a race with an
unknown, checking your units. (d) Is the answer
acceleration of . (a) What is her speed
reasonable when compared with the time for a
2.40 s later? (b) Sketch a graph of her position vs.
heartbeat?
time for this period.
27. In a slap shot, a hockey player accelerates the
21. A well-thrown ball is caught in a well-padded mitt.
puck from a velocity of 8.00 m/s to 40.0 m/s in the
If the deceleration of the ball is ,
same direction. If this shot takes ,
and 1.85 ms elapses from the
calculate the distance over which the puck
time the ball first touches the mitt until it stops,
accelerates.
what was the initial velocity of the ball?
28. A powerful motorcycle can accelerate from rest to
22. A bullet in a gun is accelerated from the firing
26.8 m/s (100 km/h) in only 3.90 s. (a) What is its
chamber to the end of the barrel at an average
average acceleration? (b) How far does it travel in
rate of for . What that time?
is its muzzle velocity (that is, its final velocity)? 29. Freight trains can produce only relatively small
23. (a) A light-rail commuter train accelerates at a rate accelerations and decelerations. (a) What is the
of . How long does it take to reach its final velocity of a freight train that accelerates at a
top speed of 80.0 km/h, starting from rest? (b) The rate of for 8.00 min, starting with an
same train ordinarily decelerates at a rate of initial velocity of 4.00 m/s? (b) If the train can
. How long does it take to come to a slow down at a rate of , how long will it
stop from its top speed? (c) In emergencies the take to come to a stop from this velocity? (c) How
train can decelerate more rapidly, coming to rest far will it travel in each case?
from 80.0 km/h in 8.30 s. What is its emergency 30. A fireworks shell is accelerated from rest to a
deceleration in ? velocity of 65.0 m/s over a distance of 0.250 m.
24. While entering a freeway, a car accelerates from (a) How long did the acceleration last? (b)
rest at a rate of for 12.0 s. (a) Draw a Calculate the acceleration.
sketch of the situation. (b) List the knowns in this 31. A swan on a lake gets airborne by flapping its
problem. (c) How far does the car travel in those wings and running on top of the water. (a) If the
12.0 s? To solve this part, first identify the swan must reach a velocity of 6.00 m/s to take off
unknown, and then discuss how you chose the and it accelerates from rest at an average rate of
appropriate equation to solve for it. After choosing , how far will it travel before becoming
the equation, show your steps in solving for the airborne? (b) How long does this take?
unknown, check your units, and discuss whether 32. Professional Application:
the answer is reasonable. (d) What is the car’s A woodpecker’s brain is specially protected from
final velocity? Solve for this unknown in the same large decelerations by tendon-like attachments
manner as in part (c), showing all steps explicitly. inside the skull. While pecking on a tree, the
25. At the end of a race, a runner decelerates from a woodpecker’s head comes to a stop from an initial
velocity of 9.00 m/s at a rate of . (a) velocity of 0.600 m/s in a distance of only 2.00
How far does she travel in the next 5.00 s? (b) mm. (a) Find the acceleration in and in
What is her final velocity? (c) Evaluate the result. multiples of . (b) Calculate the
Does it make sense?
stopping time. (c) The tendons cradling the brain
stretch, making its stopping distance 4.50 mm
(greater than the head and, hence, less
deceleration of the brain). What is the brain’s
deceleration, expressed in multiples of ?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 113
2 • Problems & Exercises 95
33. An unwary football player collides with a padded 38. A bicycle racer sprints at the end of a race to
goalpost while running at a velocity of 7.50 m/s clinch a victory. The racer has an initial velocity of
and comes to a full stop after compressing the 11.5 m/s and accelerates at the rate of
padding and his body 0.350 m. (a) What is his for 7.00 s. (a) What is his final
deceleration? (b) How long does the collision last? velocity? (b) The racer continues at this velocity to
34. In World War II, there were several reported cases the finish line. If he was 300 m from the finish line
of airmen who jumped from their flaming airplanes when he started to accelerate, how much time did
with no parachute to escape certain death. Some he save? (c) One other racer was 5.00 m ahead
fell about 20,000 feet (6000 m), and some of when the winner started to accelerate, but he was
them survived, with few life-threatening injuries. unable to accelerate, and traveled at 11.8 m/s
For these lucky pilots, the tree branches and snow until the finish line. How far ahead of him (in
drifts on the ground allowed their deceleration to meters and in seconds) did the winner finish?
be relatively small. If we assume that a pilot’s 39. In 1967, New Zealander Burt Munro set the world
speed upon impact was 123 mph (54 m/s), then record for an Indian motorcycle, on the Bonneville
what was his deceleration? Assume that the trees Salt Flats in Utah, with a maximum speed of
and snow stopped him over a distance of 3.0 m. 183.58 mi/h. The one-way course was 5.00 mi
35. Consider a grey squirrel falling out of a tree to the long. Acceleration rates are often described by the
ground. (a) If we ignore air resistance in this case time it takes to reach 60.0 mi/h from rest. If this
(only for the sake of this problem), determine a time was 4.00 s, and Burt accelerated at this rate
squirrel’s velocity just before hitting the ground, until he reached his maximum speed, how long
assuming it fell from a height of 3.0 m. (b) If the did it take Burt to complete the course?
squirrel stops in a distance of 2.0 cm through 40. (a) A world record was set for the men’s 100-m
bending its limbs, compare its deceleration with dash in the 2008 Olympic Games in Beijing by
that of the airman in the previous problem. Usain Bolt of Jamaica. Bolt “coasted” across the
36. An express train passes through a station. It finish line with a time of 9.69 s. If we assume that
enters with an initial velocity of 22.0 m/s and Bolt accelerated for 3.00 s to reach his maximum
decelerates at a rate of as it goes speed, and maintained that speed for the rest of
through. The station is 210 m long. (a) How long the race, calculate his maximum speed and his
did the nose of the train stay in the station? (b) acceleration. (b) During the same Olympics, Bolt
How fast is it going when the nose leaves the also set the world record in the 200-m dash with a
station? (c) If the train is 130 m long, when does time of 19.30 s. Using the same assumptions as
the end of the train leave the station? (d) What is for the 100-m dash, what was his maximum speed
the velocity of the end of the train as it leaves? for this race?
37. Dragsters can actually reach a top speed of 145
m/s in only 4.45 s—considerably less time than 2.7Falling Objects
given inExample 2.10andExample 2.11. (a)
Assume air resistance is negligible unless otherwise
Calculate the average acceleration for such a
stated.
dragster. (b) Find the final velocity of this dragster
starting from rest and accelerating at the rate 41. Calculate the displacement and velocity at times
found in (a) for 402 m (a quarter mile) without of (a) 0.500, (b) 1.00, (c) 1.50, and (d) 2.00 s for a
using any information on time. (c) Why is the final ball thrown straight up with an initial velocity of
velocity greater than that used to find the average 15.0 m/s. Take the point of release to be .
acceleration?Hint: Consider whether the 42. Calculate the displacement and velocity at times
assumption of constant acceleration is valid for a of (a) 0.500, (b) 1.00, (c) 1.50, (d) 2.00, and (e)
dragster. If not, discuss whether the acceleration 2.50 s for a rock thrown straight down with an
would be greater at the beginning or end of the initial velocity of 14.0 m/s from the Verrazano
run and what effect that would have on the final Narrows Bridge in New York City. The roadway of
velocity. this bridge is 70.0 m above the water.
43. A basketball referee tosses the ball straight up for
the starting tip-off. At what velocity must a
basketball player leave the ground to rise 1.25 m
above the floor in an attempt to get the ball?
PAGE: 114
96 2 • Problems & Exercises
44. A rescue helicopter is hovering over a person 51. Standing at the base of one of the cliffs of Mt.
whose boat has sunk. One of the rescuers throws Arapiles in Victoria, Australia, a hiker hears a rock
a life preserver straight down to the victim with an break loose from a height of 105 m. He can’t see
initial velocity of 1.40 m/s and observes that it the rock right away but then does, 1.50 s later. (a)
takes 1.8 s to reach the water. (a) List the knowns How far above the hiker is the rock when he can
in this problem. (b) How high above the water was see it? (b) How much time does he have to move
the preserver released? Note that the downdraft before the rock hits his head?
of the helicopter reduces the effects of air 52. An object is dropped from a height of 75.0 m
resistance on the falling life preserver, so that an above ground level. (a) Determine the distance
acceleration equal to that of gravity is reasonable. traveled during the first second. (b) Determine the
45. A dolphin in an aquatic show jumps straight up out final velocity at which the object hits the ground.
of the water at a velocity of 13.0 m/s. (a) List the (c) Determine the distance traveled during the last
knowns in this problem. (b) How high does his second of motion before hitting the ground.
body rise above the water? To solve this part, first 53. There is a 250-m-high cliff at Half Dome in
note that the final velocity is now a known and Yosemite National Park in California. Suppose a
identify its value. Then identify the unknown, and boulder breaks loose from the top of this cliff. (a)
discuss how you chose the appropriate equation How fast will it be going when it strikes the
to solve for it. After choosing the equation, show ground? (b) Assuming a reaction time of 0.300 s,
your steps in solving for the unknown, checking how long will a tourist at the bottom have to get
units, and discuss whether the answer is out of the way after hearing the sound of the rock
reasonable. (c) How long is the dolphin in the air? breaking loose (neglecting the height of the
Neglect any effects due to his size or orientation. tourist, which would become negligible anyway if
46. A swimmer bounces straight up from a diving hit)? The speed of sound is 335 m/s on this day.
board and falls feet first into a pool. She starts 54. A ball is thrown straight up. It passes a 2.00-m-
with a velocity of 4.00 m/s, and her takeoff point is high window 7.50 m off the ground on its path up
1.80 m above the pool. (a) How long are her feet in and takes 0.312 s to go past the window. What
the air? (b) What is her highest point above the was the ball’s initial velocity? Hint: First consider
board? (c) What is her velocity when her feet hit only the distance along the window, and solve for
the water? the ball's velocity at the bottom of the window.
47. (a) Calculate the height of a cliff if it takes 2.35 s Next, consider only the distance from the ground
for a rock to hit the ground when it is thrown to the bottom of the window, and solve for the
straight up from the cliff with an initial velocity of initial velocity using the velocity at the bottom of
8.00 m/s. (b) How long would it take to reach the the window as the final velocity.
ground if it is thrown straight down with the same 55. Suppose you drop a rock into a dark well and,
speed? using precision equipment, you measure the time
48. A very strong, but inept, shot putter puts the shot for the sound of a splash to return. (a) Neglecting
straight up vertically with an initial velocity of 11.0 the time required for sound to travel up the well,
m/s. How long does he have to get out of the way calculate the distance to the water if the sound
if the shot was released at a height of 2.20 m, and returns in 2.0000 s. (b) Now calculate the distance
he is 1.80 m tall? taking into account the time for sound to travel up
49. You throw a ball straight up with an initial velocity the well. The speed of sound is 332.00 m/s in this
of 15.0 m/s. It passes a tree branch on the way up well.
at a height of 7.00 m. How much additional time 56. A steel ball is dropped onto a hard floor from a
will pass before the ball passes the tree branch on height of 1.50 m and rebounds to a height of 1.45
the way back down? m. (a) Calculate its velocity just before it strikes
50. A kangaroo can jump over an object 2.50 m high. the floor. (b) Calculate its velocity just after it
(a) Calculate its vertical speed when it leaves the leaves the floor on its way back up. (c) Calculate
ground. (b) How long is it in the air? its acceleration during contact with the floor if that
contact lasts 0.0800 ms . (d) How
much did the ball compress during its collision
with the floor, assuming the floor is absolutely
rigid?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 115
2 • Problems & Exercises 97
57. A coin is dropped from a hot-air balloon that is 60. Using approximate values, calculate the slope of
300 m above the ground and rising at 10.0 m/s the curve inFigure 2.60to verify that the velocity
upward. For the coin, find (a) the maximum height at is approximately 0.24 m/s. Assume
reached, (b) its position and velocity 4.00 s after all values are known to 2 significant figures.
being released, and (c) the time before it hits the
ground.
58. A soft tennis ball is dropped onto a hard floor from
a height of 1.50 m and rebounds to a height of
1.10 m. (a) Calculate its velocity just before it
strikes the floor. (b) Calculate its velocity just after
it leaves the floor on its way back up. (c) Calculate
its acceleration during contact with the floor if that
contact lasts 3.50 ms . (d) How
much did the ball compress during its collision FIGURE2.60
with the floor, assuming the floor is absolutely
61. Using approximate values, calculate the slope of
rigid?
the curve inFigure 2.60to verify that the velocity
at is approximately 0.24 m/s.
2.8Graphical Analysis of One-Dimensional
62. By taking the slope of the curve inFigure 2.61,
Motion
verify that the acceleration is at .
Note: There is always uncertainty in numbers taken
from graphs. If your answers differ from expected
values, examine them to see if they are within data
extraction uncertainties estimated by you.
59. (a) By taking the slope of the curve inFigure 2.58,
verify that the velocity of the jet car is 115 m/s at
. (b) By taking the slope of the curve at
any point inFigure 2.59, verify that the jet car’s
acceleration is .
FIGURE2.61
63. Construct the position graph for the subway
shuttle train as shown inFigure 2.18(a). Your
graph should show the position of the train, in
kilometers, from t = 0 to 20 s. You will need to use
the information on acceleration and velocity given
in the examples for this figure.
FIGURE2.58
FIGURE2.59
PAGE: 116
98 2 • Problems & Exercises
64. (a) Take the slope of the curve inFigure 2.62to find the 65. A graph of is shown for a world-class track
jogger’s velocity at . (b) Repeat at 7.5 s. These sprinter in a 100-m race. (SeeFigure 2.65). (a)
values must be consistent with the graph inFigure What is his average velocity for the first 4 s? (b)
2.63. What is his instantaneous velocity at ? (c)
What is his average acceleration between 0 and 4
s? (d) What is his time for the race?
FIGURE2.62
FIGURE2.65
66. Figure 2.66shows the position graph for a particle
for 6 s. (a) Draw the corresponding Velocity vs.
Time graph. (b) What is the acceleration between
0 s and 2 s? (c) What happens to the acceleration
at exactly 2 s?
FIGURE2.63
FIGURE2.66
67. Critical ThinkingTwo cars are side by side on a
path where friction is negligible. Car A starts from
rest and has a positive, constant acceleration
while car B travels at a constant speed. The cars
reach the same check point down the road at the
same time. (a) Which car is traveling faster at the
check point? Briefly explain your reasoning. (b)
Based on experimental data, an equation that fits
FIGURE2.64
the data is suggested for the speed of car A at the
check point,V, which may not be correct:
, whereKis a constant with appropriate
units and is the initial velocity of car B. Is this
equation consistent with your answer from part a?
Explain why or why not. Does this equation make
sense? Explain why or why not. (c) Graph the
velocity of car A and the velocity of car B vs.
distance along the path, starting when the cars are
side by side.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 117
CHAPTER 3
Two-Dimensional Kinematics
FIGURE3.1Hitting a tennis ball is difficult enough when it is traveling at high speeds in a relatively straight line. However, most motion is in
curved, rather than straight-line, paths. Tennis players must account for the arc of the ball and the impact of its spin, while they also predict
how it will bounce and plan the location of their shot. Motion along a curved path is two- or three-dimensional motion, and can be
described in a similar fashion to one-dimensional motion. (credit: Edwin Martinez/Flickr)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
3.1Kinematics in Two Dimensions: An Introduction
3.2Vector Addition and Subtraction: Graphical Methods
3.3Vector Addition and Subtraction: Analytical Methods
3.4Projectile Motion
3.5Addition of Velocities
INTRODUCTION TO TWO-DIMENSIONAL KINEMATICS The arc of a basketball, the orbit of a satellite, a bicycle
rounding a curve, a swimmer diving into a pool, blood gushing out of a wound, and a puppy chasing its tail are but a
few examples of motions along curved paths. In fact, most motions in nature follow curved paths rather than
straight lines. Motion along a curved path on a flat surface or a plane (such as that of a ball on a pool table or a
skater on an ice rink) is two-dimensional, and thus described by two-dimensional kinematics. Motion not confined
to a plane, such as a car following a winding mountain road, is described by three-dimensional kinematics. Both
two- and three-dimensional kinematics are simple extensions of the one-dimensional kinematics developed for
straight-line motion in the previous chapter. This simple extension will allow us to apply physics to many more
situations, and it will also yield unexpected insights about nature.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/3-introduction-to-twodimensional-
kinematics)
PAGE: 118
100 3 • Two-Dimensional Kinematics
3.1 Kinematics in Two Dimensions: An Introduction
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Observe that motion in two dimensions consists of horizontal and vertical components.
• Understand the independence of horizontal and vertical vectors in two-dimensional motion.
FIGURE3.2Walkers and drivers in a city like New York are rarely able to travel in straight lines to reach their destinations. Instead, they
must follow roads and sidewalks, making two-dimensional, zigzagged paths. (credit: Margaret W. Carruthers)
Two-Dimensional Motion: Walking in a City
Suppose you want to walk from one point to another in a city with uniform square blocks, as pictured inFigure 3.3.
FIGURE3.3A pedestrian walks a two-dimensional path between two points in a city. In this scene, all blocks are square and are the same
size.
The straight-line path that a helicopter might fly is blocked to you as a pedestrian, and so you are forced to take a
two-dimensional path, such as the one shown. You walk 14 blocks in all, 9 east followed by 5 north. What is the
straight-line distance?
An old adage states that the shortest distance between two points is a straight line. The two legs of the trip and the
straight-line path form a right triangle, and so the Pythagorean theorem, , can be used to find the
straight-line distance.
FIGURE3.4The Pythagorean theorem relates the length of the legs of a right triangle, labeled and , with the hypotenuse, labeled . The
relationship is given by: . This can be rewritten, solving for : .
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 119
3.1 • Kinematics in Two Dimensions: An Introduction 101
The hypotenuse of the triangle is the straight-line path, and so in this case its length in units of city blocks is
, considerably shorter than the 14 blocks you walked. (Note that we are
using three significant figures in the answer. Although it appears that “9” and “5” have only one significant digit,
they are discrete numbers. In this case “9 blocks” is the same as “9.0 or 9.00 blocks.” We have decided to use three
significant figures in the answer in order to show the result more precisely.)
FIGURE3.5The straight-line path followed by a helicopter between the two points is shorter than the 14 blocks walked by the pedestrian.
All blocks are square and the same size.
The fact that the straight-line distance (10.3 blocks) inFigure 3.5is less than the total distance walked (14 blocks)
is one example of a general characteristic of vectors. (Recall thatvectorsare quantities that have both magnitude
and direction.)
As for one-dimensional kinematics, we use arrows to represent vectors. The length of the arrow is proportional to
the vector’s magnitude. The arrow’s length is indicated by hash marks inFigure 3.3andFigure 3.5. The arrow points
in the same direction as the vector. For two-dimensional motion, the path of an object can be represented with three
vectors: one vector shows the straight-line path between the initial and final points of the motion, one vector shows
the horizontal component of the motion, and one vector shows the vertical component of the motion. The horizontal
and vertical components of the motion add together to give the straight-line path. For example, observe the three
vectors inFigure 3.5. The first represents a 9-block displacement east. The second represents a 5-block
displacement north. These vectors are added to give the third vector, with a 10.3-block total displacement. The third
vector is the straight-line path between the two points. Note that in this example, the vectors that we are adding are
perpendicular to each other and thus form a right triangle. This means that we can use the Pythagorean theorem to
calculate the magnitude of the total displacement. (Note that we cannot use the Pythagorean theorem to add
vectors that are not perpendicular. We will develop techniques for adding vectors having any direction, not just
those perpendicular to one another, inVector Addition and Subtraction: Graphical MethodsandVector Addition and
Subtraction: Analytical Methods.)
The Independence of Perpendicular Motions
The person taking the path shown inFigure 3.5walks east and then north (two perpendicular directions). How far
they walk east is only affected by their motion eastward. Similarly, how far they walk north is only affected by their
motion northward.
Independence of Motion
The horizontal and vertical components of two-dimensional motion are independent of each other. Any motion
in the horizontal direction does not affect motion in the vertical direction, and vice versa.
This is true in a simple scenario like that of walking in one direction first, followed by another. It is also true of more
complicated motion involving movement in two directions at once. For example, let’s compare the motions of two
baseballs. One baseball is dropped from rest. At the same instant, another is thrown horizontally from the same
height and follows a curved path. A stroboscope has captured the positions of the balls at fixed time intervals as
they fall.
PAGE: 120
102 3 • Two-Dimensional Kinematics
FIGURE3.6This shows the motions of two identical balls—one falls from rest, the other has an initial horizontal velocity. Each subsequent
position is an equal time interval. Arrows represent horizontal and vertical velocities at each position. The ball on the right has an initial
horizontal velocity, while the ball on the left has no horizontal velocity. Despite the difference in horizontal velocities, the vertical velocities
and positions are identical for both balls. This shows that the vertical and horizontal motions are independent.
It is remarkable that for each flash of the strobe, the vertical positions of the two balls are the same. This similarity
implies that the vertical motion is independent of whether or not the ball is moving horizontally. (Assuming no air
resistance, the vertical motion of a falling object is influenced by gravity only, and not by any horizontal forces.)
Careful examination of the ball thrown horizontally shows that it travels the same horizontal distance between
flashes. This is due to the fact that there are no additional forces on the ball in the horizontal direction after it is
thrown. This result means that the horizontal velocity is constant, and affected neither by vertical motion nor by
gravity (which is vertical). Note that this case is true only for ideal conditions. In the real world, air resistance will
affect the speed of the balls in both directions.
The two-dimensional curved path of the horizontally thrown ball is composed of two independent one-dimensional
motions (horizontal and vertical). The key to analyzing such motion, calledprojectile motion, is toresolve(break) it
into motions along perpendicular directions. Resolving two-dimensional motion into perpendicular components is
possible because the components are independent. We shall see how to resolve vectors inVector Addition and
Subtraction: Graphical MethodsandVector Addition and Subtraction: Analytical Methods. We will find such
techniques to be useful in many areas of physics.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Ladybug Motion 2D
Learn about position, velocity and acceleration vectors. Move the ladybug by setting the position, velocity or
acceleration, and see how the vectors change. Choose linear, circular or elliptical motion, and record and playback
the motion to analyze the behavior.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/l/28ladybugmotion).
3.2 Vector Addition and Subtraction: Graphical Methods
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Understand the rules of vector addition, subtraction, and multiplication.
• Apply graphical methods of vector addition and subtraction to determine the displacement of moving
objects.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 121
3.2 • Vector Addition and Subtraction: Graphical Methods 103
FIGURE3.7Displacement can be determined graphically using a scale map, such as this one of the Hawaiian Islands. A journey from
Hawai’i to Moloka’i has a number of legs, or journey segments. These segments can be added graphically with a ruler to determine the total
two-dimensional displacement of the journey. (credit: US Geological Survey)
Vectors in Two Dimensions
Avectoris a quantity that has magnitude and direction. Displacement, velocity, acceleration, and force, for example,
are all vectors. In one-dimensional, or straight-line, motion, the direction of a vector can be given simply by a plus or
minus sign. In two dimensions (2-d), however, we specify the direction of a vector relative to some reference frame
(i.e., coordinate system), using an arrow having length proportional to the vector’s magnitude and pointing in the
direction of the vector.
Figure 3.8shows such agraphical representation of a vector, using as an example the total displacement for the
person walking in a city considered inKinematics in Two Dimensions: An Introduction. We shall use the notation
that a boldface symbol, such as , stands for a vector. Its magnitude is represented by the symbol in italics, , and
its direction by .
Vectors in this Text
In this text, we will represent a vector with a boldface variable. For example, we will represent the quantity force
with the vector , which has both magnitude and direction. The magnitude of the vector will be represented by a
variable in italics, such as , and the direction of the variable will be given by an angle .
FIGURE3.8A person walks 9 blocks east and 5 blocks north. The displacement is 10.3 blocks at an angle north of east.
PAGE: 122
104 3 • Two-Dimensional Kinematics
FIGURE3.9To describe the resultant vector for the person walking in a city considered inFigure 3.8graphically, draw an arrow to represent
the total displacement vector . Using a protractor, draw a line at an angle relative to the east-west axis. The length of the arrow is
proportional to the vector’s magnitude and is measured along the line with a ruler. In this example, the magnitude of the vector is 10.3
units, and the direction is north of east.
Vector Addition: Head-to-Tail Method
Thehead-to-tail methodis a graphical way to add vectors, described inFigure 3.10below and in the steps
following. Thetailof the vector is the starting point of the vector, and thehead(or tip) of a vector is the final,
pointed end of the arrow.
FIGURE3.10Head-to-Tail Method:The head-to-tail method of graphically adding vectors is illustrated for the two displacements of the
person walking in a city considered inFigure 3.8. (a) Draw a vector representing the displacement to the east. (b) Draw a vector
representing the displacement to the north. The tail of this vector should originate from the head of the first, east-pointing vector. (c) Draw a
line from the tail of the east-pointing vector to the head of the north-pointing vector to form the sum orresultant vector . The length of
the arrow is proportional to the vector’s magnitude and is measured to be 10.3 units . Its direction, described as the angle with respect
to the east (or horizontal axis) is measured with a protractor to be .
Step 1.Draw an arrow to represent the first vector (9 blocks to the east) using a ruler and protractor.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 123
3.2 • Vector Addition and Subtraction: Graphical Methods 105
FIGURE3.11
Step 2.Now draw an arrow to represent the second vector (5 blocks to the north).Place the tail of the second vector
at the head of the first vector.
FIGURE3.12
Step 3.If there are more than two vectors, continue this process for each vector to be added. Note that in our
example, we have only two vectors, so we have finished placing arrows tip to tail.
Step 4.Draw an arrow from the tail of the first vector to the head of the last vector. This is theresultant, or the sum,
of the other vectors.
FIGURE3.13
Step 5.To get themagnitudeof the resultant,measure its length with a ruler. (Note that in most calculations, we
will use the Pythagorean theorem to determine this length.)
PAGE: 124
106 3 • Two-Dimensional Kinematics
Step 6.To get thedirectionof the resultant,measure the angle it makes with the reference frame using a
protractor. (Note that in most calculations, we will use trigonometric relationships to determine this angle.)
The graphical addition of vectors is limited in accuracy only by the precision with which the drawings can be made
and the precision of the measuring tools. It is valid for any number of vectors.
EXAMPLE 3.1
Adding Vectors Graphically Using the Head-to-Tail Method: A Woman Takes a Walk
Use the graphical technique for adding vectors to find the total displacement of a person who walks the following
three paths (displacements) on a flat field. First, she walks 25.0 m in a direction north of east. Then, she walks
23.0 m heading north of east. Finally, she turns and walks 32.0 m in a direction 68.0° south of east.
Strategy
Represent each displacement vector graphically with an arrow, labeling the first , the second , and the third ,
making the lengths proportional to the distance and the directions as specified relative to an east-west line. The
head-to-tail method outlined above will give a way to determine the magnitude and direction of the resultant
displacement, denoted .
Solution
(1) Draw the three displacement vectors.
FIGURE3.14
(2) Place the vectors head to tail retaining both their initial magnitude and direction.
FIGURE3.15
(3) Draw the resultant vector, .
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 125
3.2 • Vector Addition and Subtraction: Graphical Methods 107
FIGURE3.16
(4) Use a ruler to measure the magnitude of , and a protractor to measure the direction of . While the direction of
the vector can be specified in many ways, the easiest way is to measure the angle between the vector and the
nearest horizontal or vertical axis. Since the resultant vector is south of the eastward pointing axis, we flip the
protractor upside down and measure the angle between the eastward axis and the vector.
FIGURE3.17
In this case, the total displacement is seen to have a magnitude of 50.8 m and to lie in a direction south of
east. By using its magnitude and direction, this vector can be expressed as and south of east.
Discussion
The head-to-tail graphical method of vector addition works for any number of vectors. It is also important to note
that the resultant is independent of the order in which the vectors are added. Therefore, we could add the vectors in
any order as illustrated inFigure 3.18and we will still get the same solution.
FIGURE3.18
Here, we see that when the same vectors are added in a different order, the result is the same. This characteristic is
true in every case and is an important characteristic of vectors. Vector addition iscommutative. Vectors can be
PAGE: 126
108 3 • Two-Dimensional Kinematics
added in any order.
3.1
(This is true for the addition of ordinary numbers as well—you get the same result whether you add or ,
for example).
Vector Subtraction
Vector subtraction is a straightforward extension of vector addition. To define subtraction (say we want to subtract
from , written , we must first define what we mean by subtraction. Thenegativeof a vector is defined to
be ; that is, graphicallythe negative of any vector has the same magnitude but the opposite direction, as shown in
Figure 3.19. In other words, has the same length as , but points in the opposite direction. Essentially, we just
flip the vector so it points in the opposite direction.
FIGURE3.19The negative of a vector is just another vector of the same magnitude but pointing in the opposite direction. So is the
negative of ; it has the same length but opposite direction.
Thesubtractionof vector from vector is then simply defined to be the addition of to . Note that vector
subtraction is the addition of a negative vector. The order of subtraction does not affect the results.
3.2
This is analogous to the subtraction of scalars (where, for example, ). Again, the result is
independent of the order in which the subtraction is made. When vectors are subtracted graphically, the techniques
outlined above are used, as the following example illustrates.
EXAMPLE 3.2
Subtracting Vectors Graphically: A Woman Sailing a Boat
A woman sailing a boat at night is following directions to a dock. The instructions read to first sail 27.5 m in a
direction north of east from her current location, and then travel 30.0 m in a direction north of east (or
west of north). If the woman makes a mistake and travels in theoppositedirection for the second leg of the
trip, where will she end up? Compare this location with the location of the dock.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 127
3.2 • Vector Addition and Subtraction: Graphical Methods 109
FIGURE3.20
Strategy
We can represent the first leg of the trip with a vector , and the second leg of the trip with a vector . The dock is
located at a location . If the woman mistakenly travels in theoppositedirection for the second leg of the
journey, she will travel a distance (30.0 m) in the direction south of east. We represent this as
, as shown below. The vector has the same magnitude as but is in the opposite direction. Thus, she will end
up at a location , or .
FIGURE3.21
We will perform vector addition to compare the location of the dock, , with the location at which the woman
mistakenly arrives, .
Solution
(1) To determine the location at which the woman arrives by accident, draw vectors and .
(2) Place the vectors head to tail.
(3) Draw the resultant vector .
(4) Use a ruler and protractor to measure the magnitude and direction of .
FIGURE3.22
In this case, and south of east.
PAGE: 128
110 3 • Two-Dimensional Kinematics
(5) To determine the location of the dock, we repeat this method to add vectors and . We obtain the resultant
vector :
FIGURE3.23
In this case and northofeast.
We can see that the woman will end up a significant distance from the dock if she travels in the opposite direction
for the second leg of the trip.
Discussion
Because subtraction of a vector is the same as addition of a vector with the opposite direction, the graphical method
of subtracting vectors works the same as for addition.
Multiplication of Vectors and Scalars
If we decided to walk three times as far on the first leg of the trip considered in the preceding example, then we
would walk , or 82.5 m, in a direction north of east. This is an example of multiplying a vector by a
positivescalar. Notice that the magnitude changes, but the direction stays the same.
If the scalar is negative, then multiplying a vector by it changes the vector’s magnitude and gives the new vector the
oppositedirection. For example, if you multiply by –2, the magnitude doubles but the direction changes. We can
summarize these rules in the following way: When vector is multiplied by a scalar ,
• the magnitude of the vector becomes the absolute value of ,
• if is positive, the direction of the vector does not change,
• if is negative, the direction is reversed.
In our case, and . Vectors are multiplied by scalars in many situations. Note that division is the
inverse of multiplication. For example, dividing by 2 is the same as multiplying by the value (1/2). The rules for
multiplication of vectors by scalars are the same for division; simply treat the divisor as a scalar between 0 and 1.
Resolving a Vector into Components
In the examples above, we have been adding vectors to determine the resultant vector. In many cases, however, we
will need to do the opposite. We will need to take a single vector and find what other vectors added together
produce it. In most cases, this involves determining the perpendicularcomponentsof a single vector, for example
thex-andy-components, or the north-south and east-west components.
For example, we may know that the total displacement of a person walking in a city is 10.3 blocks in a direction
north of east and want to find out how many blocks east and north had to be walked. This method is called
finding the components (or parts)of the displacement in the east and north directions, and it is the inverse of the
process followed to find the total displacement. It is one example of finding the components of a vector. There are
many applications in physics where this is a useful thing to do. We will see this soon inProjectile Motion, and much
more when we coverforcesinDynamics: Newton’s Laws of Motion. Most of these involve finding components along
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 129
3.3 • Vector Addition and Subtraction: Analytical Methods 111
perpendicular axes (such as north and east), so that right triangles are involved. The analytical techniques
presented inVector Addition and Subtraction: Analytical Methodsare ideal for finding vector components.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Maze Game
Learn about position, velocity, and acceleration in the "Arena of Pain". Use the green arrow to move the ball. Add
more walls to the arena to make the game more difficult. Try to make a goal as fast as you can.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/l/28mazegame).
3.3 Vector Addition and Subtraction: Analytical Methods
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Understand the rules of vector addition and subtraction using analytical methods.
• Apply analytical methods to determine vertical and horizontal component vectors.
• Apply analytical methods to determine the magnitude and direction of a resultant vector.
Analytical methodsof vector addition and subtraction employ geometry and simple trigonometry rather than the
ruler and protractor of graphical methods. Part of the graphical technique is retained, because vectors are still
represented by arrows for easy visualization. However, analytical methods are more concise, accurate, and precise
than graphical methods, which are limited by the accuracy with which a drawing can be made. Analytical methods
are limited only by the accuracy and precision with which physical quantities are known.
Resolving a Vector into Perpendicular Components
Analytical techniques and right triangles go hand-in-hand in physics because (among other things) motions along
perpendicular directions are independent. We very often need to separate a vector into perpendicular components.
For example, given a vector like inFigure 3.24, we may wish to find which two perpendicular vectors, and ,
add to produce it.
FIGURE3.24The vector , with its tail at the origin of anx,y-coordinate system, is shown together with itsx- andy-components, and
. These vectors form a right triangle. The analytical relationships among these vectors are summarized below.
and are defined to be the components of along thex- andy-axes. The three vectors , , and form a
right triangle:
3.3
Note that this relationship between vector components and the resultant vector holds only for vector quantities
(which include both magnitude and direction). The relationship does not apply for the magnitudes alone. For
example, if east, north, and north-east, then it is true that the vectors
. However, it isnottrue that the sum of the magnitudes of the vectors is also equal. That is,
PAGE: 130
112 3 • Two-Dimensional Kinematics
3.4
Thus,
3.5
If the vector is known, then its magnitude (its length) and its angle (its direction) are known. To find and
, itsx- andy-components, we use the following relationships for a right triangle.
3.6
and
3.7
FIGURE3.25The magnitudes of the vector components and can be related to the resultant vector and the angle with
trigonometric identities. Here we see that and .
Suppose, for example, that is the vector representing the total displacement of the person walking in a city
considered inKinematics in Two Dimensions: An IntroductionandVector Addition and Subtraction: Graphical
Methods.
FIGURE3.26We can use the relationships and to determine the magnitude of the horizontal and vertical
component vectors in this example.
Then blocks and , so that
3.8
3.9
Calculating a Resultant Vector
If the perpendicular components and of a vector are known, then can also be found analytically. To find
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 131
3.3 • Vector Addition and Subtraction: Analytical Methods 113
the magnitude and direction of a vector from its perpendicular components and , relative to thex-axis,
we use the following relationships:
3.10
3.11
FIGURE3.27The magnitude and direction of the resultant vector can be determined once the horizontal and vertical components and
have been determined.
Note that the equation is just the Pythagorean theorem relating the legs of a right triangle to the
length of the hypotenuse. For example, if and are 9 and 5 blocks, respectively, then
blocks, again consistent with the example of the person walking in a city. Finally, the direction is
, as before.
Determining Vectors and Vector Components with Analytical Methods
Equations and are used to find the perpendicular components of a vector—that is,
to go from and to and . Equations and are used to find a vector
from its perpendicular components—that is, to go from and to and . Both processes are crucial to
analytical methods of vector addition and subtraction.
Adding Vectors Using Analytical Methods
To see how to add vectors using perpendicular components, considerFigure 3.28, in which the vectors and are
added to produce the resultant .
FIGURE3.28Vectors and are two legs of a walk, and is the resultant or total displacement. You can use analytical methods to
determine the magnitude and direction of .
If and represent two legs of a walk (two displacements), then is the total displacement. The person taking
the walk ends up at the tip of There are many ways to arrive at the same point. In particular, the person could
PAGE: 132
114 3 • Two-Dimensional Kinematics
have walked first in thex-direction and then in they-direction. Those paths are thex- andy-components of the
resultant, and . If we know and , we can find and using the equations and
. When you use the analytical method of vector addition, you can determine the components or
the magnitude and direction of a vector.
Step 1.Identify the x- and y-axes that will be used in the problem. Then, find the components of each vector to be
added along the chosen perpendicular axes.Use the equations and to find the
components. InFigure 3.29, these components are , , , and . The angles that vectors and make
with thex-axis are and , respectively.
FIGURE3.29To add vectors and , first determine the horizontal and vertical components of each vector. These are the dotted vectors
, , and shown in the image.
Step 2.Find the components of the resultant along each axis by adding the components of the individual vectors
along that axis.That is, as shown inFigure 3.30,
3.12
and
3.13
FIGURE3.30The magnitude of the vectors and add to give the magnitude of the resultant vector in the horizontal direction.
Similarly, the magnitudes of the vectors and add to give the magnitude of the resultant vector in the vertical direction.
Components along the same axis, say thex-axis, are vectors along the same line and, thus, can be added to one
another like ordinary numbers. The same is true for components along they-axis. (For example, a 9-block eastward
walk could be taken in two legs, the first 3 blocks east and the second 6 blocks east, for a total of 9, because they
are along the same direction.) So resolving vectors into components along common axes makes it easier to add
them. Now that the components of are known, its magnitude and direction can be found.
Step 3.To get the magnitude of the resultant, use the Pythagorean theorem:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 133
3.3 • Vector Addition and Subtraction: Analytical Methods 115
3.14
Step 4.To get the direction of the resultant relative to thex-axis:
3.15
The following example illustrates this technique for adding vectors using perpendicular components.
EXAMPLE 3.3
Adding Vectors Using Analytical Methods
Add the vector to the vector shown inFigure 3.31, using perpendicular components along thex- andy-axes.
Thex- andy-axes are along the east–west and north–south directions, respectively. Vector represents the first
leg of a walk in which a person walks in a direction north of east. Vector represents the second leg, a
displacement of in a direction north of east.
FIGURE3.31Vector has magnitude and direction north of thex-axis. Vector has magnitude and direction
north of thex-axis. You can use analytical methods to determine the magnitude and direction of .
Strategy
The components of and along thex- andy-axes represent walking due east and due north to get to the same
ending point. Once found, they are combined to produce the resultant.
Solution
Following the method outlined above, we first find the components of and along thex- andy-axes. Note that
, , , and . We find thex-components by using , which
gives
3.16
and
3.17
Similarly, they-components are found using :
3.18
and
3.19
PAGE: 134
116 3 • Two-Dimensional Kinematics
Thex- andy-components of the resultant are thus
3.20
and
3.21
Now we can find the magnitude of the resultant by using the Pythagorean theorem:
3.22
so that
3.23
Finally, we find the direction of the resultant:
3.24
Thus,
3.25
FIGURE3.32Using analytical methods, we see that the magnitude of is and its direction is north of east.
Discussion
This example illustrates the addition of vectors using perpendicular components. Vector subtraction using
perpendicular components is very similar—it is just the addition of a negative vector.
Subtraction of vectors is accomplished by the addition of a negative vector. That is, . Thus,the
method for the subtraction of vectors using perpendicular components is identical to that for addition. The
components of are the negatives of the components of . Thex- andy-components of the resultant
are thus
3.26
and
3.27
and the rest of the method outlined above is identical to that for addition. (SeeFigure 3.33.)
Analyzing vectors using perpendicular components is very useful in many areas of physics, because perpendicular
quantities are often independent of one another. The next module,Projectile Motion, is one of many in which using
perpendicular components helps make the picture clear and simplifies the physics.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 135
3.4 • Projectile Motion 117
FIGURE3.33The subtraction of the two vectors shown inFigure 3.28. The components of are the negatives of the components of .
The method of subtraction is the same as that for addition.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Vector Addition
Learn how to add vectors. Drag vectors onto a graph, change their length and angle, and sum them together. The
magnitude, angle, and components of each vector can be displayed in several formats.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/3-3-vector-addition-and-subtraction-
analytical-methods)
3.4 Projectile Motion
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Identify and explain the properties of a projectile, such as acceleration due to gravity, range, maximum
height, and trajectory.
• Determine the location and velocity of a projectile at different points in its trajectory.
• Apply the principle of independence of motion to solve projectile motion problems.
Projectile motionis themotionof an object thrown or projected into the air, subject to only the acceleration of
gravity. The object is called aprojectile, and its path is called itstrajectory. The motion of falling objects, as covered
inProblem-Solving Basics for One-Dimensional Kinematics, is a simple one-dimensional type of projectile motion in
which there is no horizontal movement. In this section, we consider two-dimensional projectile motion, such as that
of a football or other object for whichair resistanceis negligible.
The most important fact to remember here is thatmotions along perpendicular axes are independentand thus can
be analyzed separately. This fact was discussed inKinematics in Two Dimensions: An Introduction, where vertical
and horizontal motions were seen to be independent. The key to analyzing two-dimensional projectile motion is to
break it into two motions, one along the horizontal axis and the other along the vertical. (This choice of axes is the
most sensible, because acceleration due to gravity is vertical—thus, there will be no acceleration along the
horizontal axis when air resistance is negligible.) As is customary, we call the horizontal axis thex-axis and the
vertical axis they-axis.Figure 3.34illustrates the notation for displacement, where is defined to be the total
displacement and and are its components along the horizontal and vertical axes, respectively. The magnitudes of
these vectors ares,x, andy. (Note that in the last section we used the notation to represent a vector with
components and . If we continued this format, we would call displacement with components and .
However, to simplify the notation, we will simply represent the component vectors as and .)
Of course, to describe motion we must deal with velocity and acceleration, as well as with displacement. We must
find their components along thex- andy-axes, too. We will assume all forces except gravity (such as air resistance
and friction, for example) are negligible. The components of acceleration are then very simple:
. (Note that this definition assumes that the upwards direction is defined as the positive
PAGE: 136
118 3 • Two-Dimensional Kinematics
direction. If you arrange the coordinate system instead such that the downwards direction is positive, then
acceleration due to gravity takes a positive value.) Because gravity is vertical, . Both accelerations are
constant, so the kinematic equations can be used.
Review of Kinematic Equations (constant )
3.28
3.29
3.30
3.31
3.32
FIGURE3.34The total displacement of a soccer ball at a point along its path. The vector has components and along the horizontal
and vertical axes. Its magnitude is , and it makes an angle with the horizontal.
Given these assumptions, the following steps are then used to analyze projectile motion:
Step 1.Resolve or break the motion into horizontal and vertical components along the x- and y-axes.These axes are
perpendicular, so and are used. The magnitude of the components of displacement
along these axes are and The magnitudes of the components of the velocity are and
where is the magnitude of the velocity and is its direction, as shown inFigure 3.35. Initial values
are denoted with a subscript 0, as usual.
Step 2.Treat the motion as two independent one-dimensional motions, one horizontal and the other vertical.The
kinematic equations for horizontal and vertical motion take the following forms:
3.33
3.34
3.35
3.36
3.37
3.38
3.39
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 137
3.4 • Projectile Motion 119
3.40
Step 3.Solve for the unknowns in the two separate motions—one horizontal and one vertical.Note that the only
common variable between the motions is time . The problem solving procedures here are the same as for one-
dimensionalkinematicsand are illustrated in the solved examples below.
Step 4.Recombine the two motions to find the total displacement and velocity . Because thex- andy-motions
are perpendicular, we determine these vectors by using the techniques outlined in theVector Addition and
Subtraction: Analytical Methodsand employing and in the following form,
where is the direction of the displacement and is the direction of the velocity :
Total displacement and velocity
3.41
3.42
3.43
3.44
PAGE: 138
120 3 • Two-Dimensional Kinematics
FIGURE3.35(a) We analyze two-dimensional projectile motion by breaking it into two independent one-dimensional motions along the
vertical and horizontal axes. (b) The horizontal motion is simple, because and is thus constant. (c) The velocity in the vertical
direction begins to decrease as the object rises; at its highest point, the vertical velocity is zero. As the object falls towards the Earth again,
the vertical velocity increases again in magnitude but points in the opposite direction to the initial vertical velocity. (d) Thex- andy
-motions are recombined to give the total velocity at any given point on the trajectory.
EXAMPLE 3.4
A Fireworks Projectile Explodes High and Away
During a fireworks display, a shell is shot into the air with an initial speed of 70.0 m/s at an angle of above the
horizontal, as illustrated inFigure 3.36. The fuse is timed to ignite the shell just as it reaches its highest point above
the ground. (a) Calculate the height at which the shell explodes. (b) How much time passed between the launch of
the shell and the explosion? (c) What is the horizontal displacement of the shell when it explodes?
Strategy
Because air resistance is negligible for the unexploded shell, the analysis method outlined above can be used. The
motion can be broken into horizontal and vertical motions in which and . We can then define and
to be zero and solve for the desired quantities.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 139
3.4 • Projectile Motion 121
Solution for (a)
By “height” we mean the altitude or vertical position above the starting point. The highest point in any trajectory,
called the apex, is reached when . Since we know the initial and final velocities as well as the initial position,
we use the following equation to find :
3.45
FIGURE3.36The trajectory of a fireworks shell. The fuse is set to explode the shell at the highest point in its trajectory, which is found to be
at a height of 233 m and 125 m away horizontally.
Because and are both zero, the equation simplifies to
3.46
Solving for gives
3.47
Now we must find , the component of the initial velocity in they-direction. It is given by , where
is the initial velocity of 70.0 m/s, and is the initial angle. Thus,
3.48
and is
3.49
so that
3.50
Discussion for (a)
Note that because up is positive, the initial velocity is positive, as is the maximum height, but the acceleration due to
gravity is negative. Note also that the maximum height depends only on the vertical component of the initial velocity,
so that any projectile with a 67.6 m/s initial vertical component of velocity will reach a maximum height of 233 m
(neglecting air resistance). The numbers in this example are reasonable for large fireworks displays, the shells of
which do reach such heights before exploding. In practice, air resistance is not completely negligible, and so the
initial velocity would have to be somewhat larger than that given to reach the same height.
PAGE: 140
122 3 • Two-Dimensional Kinematics
Solution for (b)
As in many physics problems, there is more than one way to solve for the time to the highest point. In this case, the
easiest method is to use . Because is zero, this equation reduces to simply
3.51
Note that the final vertical velocity, , at the highest point is zero. Thus,
3.52
Discussion for (b)
This time is also reasonable for large fireworks. When you are able to see the launch of fireworks, you will notice
several seconds pass before the shell explodes. (Another way of finding the time is by using ,
and solving the quadratic equation for .)
Solution for (c)
Because air resistance is negligible, and the horizontal velocity is constant, as discussed above. The
horizontal displacement is horizontal velocity multiplied by time as given by , where is equal to
zero:
3.53
where is thex-component of the velocity, which is given by Now,
3.54
The time for both motions is the same, and so is
3.55
Discussion for (c)
The horizontal motion is a constant velocity in the absence of air resistance. The horizontal displacement found here
could be useful in keeping the fireworks fragments from falling on spectators. Once the shell explodes, air
resistance has a major effect, and many fragments will land directly below.
In solving part (a) of the preceding example, the expression we found for is valid for any projectile motion where
air resistance is negligible. Call the maximum height ; then,
3.56
This equation defines themaximum height of a projectileand depends only on the vertical component of the initial
velocity.
Defining a Coordinate System
It is important to set up a coordinate system when analyzing projectile motion. One part of defining the
coordinate system is to define an origin for the and positions. Often, it is convenient to choose the initial
position of the object as the origin such that and . It is also important to define the positive and
negative directions in the and directions. Typically, we define the positive vertical direction as upwards, and
the positive horizontal direction is usually the direction of the object’s motion. When this is the case, the vertical
acceleration, , takes a negative value (since it is directed downwards towards the Earth). However, it is
occasionally useful to define the coordinates differently. For example, if you are analyzing the motion of a ball
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 141
3.4 • Projectile Motion 123
thrown downwards from the top of a cliff, it may make sense to define the positive direction downwards since
the motion of the ball is solely in the downwards direction. If this is the case, takes a positive value.
EXAMPLE 3.5
Calculating Projectile Motion: Hot Rock Projectile
Kilauea in Hawaii is the world’s most continuously active volcano. Very active volcanoes characteristically eject red-
hot rocks and lava rather than smoke and ash. Suppose a large rock is ejected from the volcano with a speed of 25.0
m/s and at an angle above the horizontal, as shown inFigure 3.37. The rock strikes the side of the volcano at
an altitude 20.0 m lower than its starting point. (a) Calculate the time it takes the rock to follow this path. (b) What
are the magnitude and direction of the rock’s velocity at impact?
FIGURE3.37The trajectory of a rock ejected from the Kilauea volcano.
Strategy
Again, resolving this two-dimensional motion into two independent one-dimensional motions will allow us to solve
for the desired quantities. The time a projectile is in the air is governed by its vertical motion alone. We will solve for
first. While the rock is rising and falling vertically, the horizontal motion continues at a constant velocity. This
example asks for the final velocity. Thus, the vertical and horizontal results will be recombined to obtain and at
the final time determined in the first part of the example.
Solution for (a)
While the rock is in the air, it rises and then falls to a final position 20.0 m lower than its starting altitude. We can find
the time for this by using
3.57
If we take the initial position to be zero, then the final position is Now the initial vertical velocity is
the vertical component of the initial velocity, found from = ( )( ) = .
Substituting known values yields
3.58
Rearranging terms gives a quadratic equation in :
3.59
This expression is a quadratic equation of the form , where the constants are , ,
and Its solutions are given by the quadratic formula:
3.60
This equation yields two solutions: and . (It is left as an exercise for the reader to verify these
PAGE: 142
124 3 • Two-Dimensional Kinematics
solutions.) The time is or . The negative value of time implies an event before the start of motion,
and so we discard it. Thus,
3.61
Discussion for (a)
The time for projectile motion is completely determined by the vertical motion. So any projectile that has an initial
vertical velocity of 14.3 m/s and lands 20.0 m below its starting altitude will spend 3.96 s in the air.
Solution for (b)
From the information now in hand, we can find the final horizontal and vertical velocities and and combine
them to find the total velocity and the angle it makes with the horizontal. Of course, is constant so we can
solve for it at any horizontal location. In this case, we chose the starting point since we know both the initial velocity
and initial angle. Therefore:
3.62
The final vertical velocity is given by the following equation:
3.63
where was found in part (a) to be . Thus,
3.64
so that
3.65
To find the magnitude of the final velocity we combine its perpendicular components, using the following
equation:
3.66
which gives
3.67
The direction is found from the equation:
3.68
so that
3.69
Thus,
3.70
Discussion for (b)
The negative angle means that the velocity is below the horizontal. This result is consistent with the fact that
the final vertical velocity is negative and hence downward—as you would expect because the final altitude is 20.0 m
lower than the initial altitude. (SeeFigure 3.37.)
One of the most important things illustrated by projectile motion is that vertical and horizontal motions are
independent of each other. Galileo was the first person to fully comprehend this characteristic. He used it to predict
the range of a projectile. On level ground, we definerangeto be the horizontal distance traveled by a projectile.
Galileo and many others were interested in the range of projectiles primarily for military purposes—such as aiming
cannons. However, investigating the range of projectiles can shed light on other interesting phenomena, such as the
orbits of satellites around the Earth. Let us consider projectile range further.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 143
3.4 • Projectile Motion 125
FIGURE3.38Trajectories of projectiles on level ground. (a) The greater the initial speed , the greater the range for a given initial angle.
(b) The effect of initial angle on the range of a projectile with a given initial speed. Note that the range is the same for and ,
although the maximum heights of those paths are different.
How does the initial velocity of a projectile affect its range? Obviously, the greater the initial speed , the greater
the range, as shown inFigure 3.38(a). The initial angle also has a dramatic effect on the range, as illustrated in
Figure 3.38(b). For a fixed initial speed, such as might be produced by a cannon, the maximum range is obtained
with . This is true only for conditions neglecting air resistance. If air resistance is considered, the maximum
angle is approximately . Interestingly, for every initial angle except , there are two angles that give the same
range—the sum of those angles is . The range also depends on the value of the acceleration of gravity . The
lunar astronaut Alan Shepherd was able to drive a golf ball a great distance on the Moon because gravity is weaker
there. The range of a projectile onlevel groundfor which air resistance is negligible is given by
3.71
where is the initial speed and is the initial angle relative to the horizontal. The proof of this equation is left as
an end-of-chapter problem (hints are given), but it does fit the major features of projectile range as described.
When we speak of the range of a projectile on level ground, we assume that is very small compared with the
circumference of the Earth. If, however, the range is large, the Earth curves away below the projectile and
acceleration of gravity changes direction along the path. The range is larger than predicted by the range equation
given above because the projectile has farther to fall than it would on level ground. (SeeFigure 3.39.) If the initial
speed is great enough, the projectile goes into orbit. This possibility was recognized centuries before it could be
accomplished. When an object is in orbit, the Earth curves away from underneath the object at the same rate as it
falls. The object thus falls continuously but never hits the surface. These and other aspects of orbital motion, such
as the rotation of the Earth, will be covered analytically and in greater depth later in this text.
Once again we see that thinking about one topic, such as the range of a projectile, can lead us to others, such as the
Earth orbits. InAddition of Velocities, we will examine the addition of velocities, which is another important aspect
of two-dimensional kinematics and will also yield insights beyond the immediate topic.
PAGE: 144
126 3 • Two-Dimensional Kinematics
FIGURE3.39Hypothetical projectile to satellite. From this theoretical tower, a projectile is launched from a very high tower to avoid air
resistance. With increasing initial speed, the range increases and becomes longer than it would be on level ground because the Earth
curves away underneath its path. With a large enough initial speed, orbit is achieved.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Projectile Motion
Blast a Buick out of a cannon! Learn about projectile motion by firing various objects. Set the angle, initial speed, and
mass. Add air resistance. Make a game out of this simulation by trying to hit a target.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/3-4-projectile-motion)
3.5 Addition of Velocities
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Apply principles of vector addition to determine relative velocity.
• Explain the significance of the observer in the measurement of velocity.
Relative Velocity
If a person rows a boat across a rapidly flowing river and tries to head directly for the other shore, the boat instead
movesdiagonallyrelative to the shore, as inFigure 3.40. The boat does not move in the direction in which it is
pointed. The reason, of course, is that the river carries the boat downstream. Similarly, if a small airplane flies
overhead in a strong crosswind, you can sometimes see that the plane is not moving in the direction in which it is
pointed, as illustrated inFigure 3.41. The plane is moving straight ahead relative to the air, but the movement of the
air mass relative to the ground carries it sideways.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 145
3.5 • Addition of Velocities 127
FIGURE3.40A boat trying to head straight across a river will actually move diagonally relative to the shore as shown. Its total velocity
(solid arrow) relative to the shore is the sum of its velocity relative to the river plus the velocity of the river relative to the shore.
FIGURE3.41An airplane heading straight north is instead carried to the west and slowed down by wind. The plane does not move relative
to the ground in the direction it points; rather, it moves in the direction of its total velocity (solid arrow).
In each of these situations, an object has avelocityrelative to a medium (such as a river) and that medium has a
velocity relative to an observer on solid ground. The velocity of the objectrelative to the observeris the sum of these
velocity vectors, as indicated inFigure 3.40andFigure 3.41. These situations are only two of many in which it is
useful to add velocities. In this module, we first re-examine how to add velocities and then consider certain aspects
of what relative velocity means.
How do we add velocities? Velocity is a vector (it has both magnitude and direction); the rules ofvector addition
discussed inVector Addition and Subtraction: Graphical MethodsandVector Addition and Subtraction: Analytical
Methodsapply to the addition of velocities, just as they do for any other vectors. In one-dimensional motion, the
addition of velocities is simple—they add like ordinary numbers. For example, if a field hockey player is moving at
straight toward the goal and drives the ball in the same direction with a velocity of relative to her body,
then the velocity of the ball is relative to the stationary, profusely sweating goalkeeper standing in front of
the goal.
In two-dimensional motion, either graphical or analytical techniques can be used to add velocities. We will
concentrate on analytical techniques. The following equations give the relationships between the magnitude and
PAGE: 146
128 3 • Two-Dimensional Kinematics
direction of velocity ( and ) and its components ( and ) along thex- andy-axes of an appropriately chosen
coordinate system:
3.72
3.73
3.74
3.75
FIGURE3.42The velocity, , of an object traveling at an angle to the horizontal axis is the sum of component vectors and .
These equations are valid for any vectors and are adapted specifically for velocity. The first two equations are used
to find the components of a velocity when its magnitude and direction are known. The last two are used to find the
magnitude and direction of velocity when its components are known.
Take-Home Experiment: Relative Velocity of a Boat
Fill a bathtub half-full of water. Take a toy boat or some other object that floats in water. Unplug the drain so
water starts to drain. Try pushing the boat from one side of the tub to the other and perpendicular to the flow of
water. Which way do you need to push the boat so that it ends up immediately opposite? Compare the directions
of the flow of water, heading of the boat, and actual velocity of the boat.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 147
3.5 • Addition of Velocities 129
EXAMPLE 3.6
Adding Velocities: A Boat on a River
FIGURE3.43A boat attempts to travel straight across a river at a speed 0.75 m/s. The current in the river, however, flows at a speed of
1.20 m/s to the right.
Refer toFigure 3.43, which shows a boat trying to go straight across the river. Let us calculate the magnitude and
direction of the boat’s velocity relative to an observer on the shore, . The velocity of the boat, , is 0.75 m/s
in the -direction relative to the river and the velocity of the river, , is 1.20 m/s to the right.
Strategy
We start by choosing a coordinate system with its -axis parallel to the velocity of the river, as shown inFigure 3.43.
Because the boat is directed straight toward the other shore, its velocity relative to the water is parallel to the -axis
and perpendicular to the velocity of the river. Thus, we can add the two velocities by using the equations
and directly.
Solution
The magnitude of the total velocity is
3.76
where
3.77
and
3.78
Thus,
3.79
yielding
3.80
The direction of the total velocity is given by:
PAGE: 148
130 3 • Two-Dimensional Kinematics
3.81
This equation gives
3.82
Discussion
Both the magnitude and the direction of the total velocity are consistent withFigure 3.43. Note that because the
velocity of the river is large compared with the velocity of the boat, it is swept rapidly downstream. This result is
evidenced by the small angle (only ) the total velocity has relative to the riverbank.
EXAMPLE 3.7
Calculating Velocity: Wind Velocity Causes an Airplane to Drift
Calculate the wind velocity for the situation shown inFigure 3.44. The plane is known to be moving at 45.0 m/s due
north relative to the air mass, while its velocity relative to the ground (its total velocity) is 38.0 m/s in a direction
west of north.
FIGURE3.44An airplane is known to be heading north at 45.0 m/s, though its velocity relative to the ground is 38.0 m/s at an angle west of
north. What is the speed and direction of the wind?
Strategy
In this problem, somewhat different from the previous example, we know the total velocity and that it is the
sum of two other velocities, (the wind) and (the plane relative to the air mass). The quantity is known, and
we are asked to find . None of the velocities are perpendicular, but it is possible to find their components along a
common set of perpendicular axes. If we can find the components of , then we can combine them to solve for its
magnitude and direction. As shown inFigure 3.44, we choose a coordinate system with itsx-axis due east and its
y-axis due north (parallel to ). (You may wish to look back at the discussion of the addition of vectors using
perpendicular components inVector Addition and Subtraction: Analytical Methods.)
Solution
Because is the vector sum of the and , itsx- andy-components are the sums of thex- andy-components
of the wind and plane velocities. Note that the plane only has vertical component of velocity so and
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 149
3.5 • Addition of Velocities 131
. That is,
3.83
and
3.84
We can use the first of these two equations to find :
3.85
Because and we have
3.86
The minus sign indicates motion west which is consistent with the diagram.
Now, to find we note that
3.87
Here ; thus,
3.88
This minus sign indicates motion south which is consistent with the diagram.
Now that the perpendicular components of the wind velocity and are known, we can find the magnitude
and direction of . First, the magnitude is
3.89
so that
3.90
The direction is:
3.91
giving
3.92
Discussion
The wind’s speed and direction are consistent with the significant effect the wind has on the total velocity of the
plane, as seen inFigure 3.44. Because the plane is fighting a strong combination of crosswind and head-wind, it
ends up with a total velocity significantly less than its velocity relative to the air mass as well as heading in a
different direction.
Note that in both of the last two examples, we were able to make the mathematics easier by choosing a coordinate
system with one axis parallel to one of the velocities. We will repeatedly find that choosing an appropriate
coordinate system makes problem solving easier. For example, in projectile motion we always use a coordinate
system with one axis parallel to gravity.
Relative Velocities and Classical Relativity
When adding velocities, we have been careful to specify that thevelocity is relative to some reference frame. These
velocities are calledrelative velocities. For example, the velocity of an airplane relative to an air mass is different
from its velocity relative to the ground. Both are quite different from the velocity of an airplane relative to its
passengers (which should be close to zero). Relative velocities are one aspect ofrelativity, which is defined to be
the study of how different observers moving relative to each other measure the same phenomenon.
PAGE: 150
132 3 • Two-Dimensional Kinematics
Nearly everyone has heard of relativity and immediately associates it with Albert Einstein (1879–1955), the greatest
physicist of the 20th century. Einstein revolutionized our view of nature with hismoderntheory of relativity, which
we shall study in later chapters. The relative velocities in this section are actually aspects of classical relativity, first
discussed correctly by Galileo and Isaac Newton.Classical relativityis limited to situations where speeds are less
than about 1% of the speed of light—that is, less than . Most things we encounter in daily life move
slower than this speed.
Let us consider an example of what two different observers see in a situation analyzed long ago by Galileo. Suppose
a sailor at the top of a mast on a moving ship drops their binoculars. Where will it hit the deck? Will it hit at the base
of the mast, or will it hit behind the mast because the ship is moving forward? The answer is that if air resistance is
negligible, the binoculars will hit at the base of the mast at a point directly below its point of release. Now let us
consider what two different observers see when the binoculars drop. One observer is on the ship and the other on
shore. The binoculars have no horizontal velocity relative to the observer on the ship, and so he sees them fall
straight down the mast. (SeeFigure 3.45.) To the observer on shore, the binoculars and the ship have thesame
horizontal velocity, so both move the same distance forward while the binoculars are falling. This observer sees the
curved path shown inFigure 3.45. Although the paths look different to the different observers, each sees the same
result—the binoculars hit at the base of the mast and not behind it. To get the correct description, it is crucial to
correctly specify the velocities relative to the observer.
FIGURE3.45Classical relativity. The same motion as viewed by two different observers. An observer on the moving ship sees the
binoculars dropped from the top of its mast fall straight down. An observer on shore sees the binoculars take the curved path, moving
forward with the ship. Both observers see the binoculars strike the deck at the base of the mast. The initial horizontal velocity is different
relative to the two observers. (The ship is shown moving rather fast to emphasize the effect.)
EXAMPLE 3.8
Calculating Relative Velocity: An Airline Passenger Drops a Coin
An airline passenger drops a coin while the plane is moving at 260 m/s. What is the velocity of the coin when it
strikes the floor 1.50 m below its point of release: (a) Measured relative to the plane? (b) Measured relative to the
Earth?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 151
3.5 • Addition of Velocities 133
FIGURE3.46The motion of a coin dropped inside an airplane as viewed by two different observers. (a) An observer in the plane sees the
coin fall straight down. (b) An observer on the ground sees the coin move almost horizontally.
Strategy
Both problems can be solved with the techniques for falling objects and projectiles. In part (a), the initial velocity of
the coin is zero relative to the plane, so the motion is that of a falling object (one-dimensional). In part (b), the initial
velocity is 260 m/s horizontal relative to the Earth and gravity is vertical, so this motion is a projectile motion. In
both parts, it is best to use a coordinate system with vertical and horizontal axes.
Solution for (a)
Using the given information, we note that the initial velocity and position are zero, and the final position is 1.50 m.
The final velocity can be found using the equation:
3.93
Substituting known values into the equation, we get
3.94
yielding
3.95
We know that the square root of 29.4 has two roots: 5.42 and -5.42. We choose the negative root because we know
that the velocity is directed downwards, and we have defined the positive direction to be upwards. There is no initial
horizontal velocity relative to the plane and no horizontal acceleration, and so the motion is straight down relative to
the plane.
Solution for (b)
Because the initial vertical velocity is zero relative to the ground and vertical motion is independent of horizontal
motion, the final vertical velocity for the coin relative to the ground is , the same as found in part (a).
In contrast to part (a), there now is a horizontal component of the velocity. However, since there is no horizontal
acceleration, the initial and final horizontal velocities are the same and . Thex- andy-components of
velocity can be combined to find the magnitude of the final velocity:
PAGE: 152
134 3 • Two-Dimensional Kinematics
3.96
Thus,
3.97
yielding
3.98
The direction is given by:
3.99
so that
3.100
Discussion
In part (a), the final velocity relative to the plane is the same as it would be if the coin were dropped from rest on the
Earth and fell 1.50 m. This result fits our experience; objects in a plane fall the same way when the plane is flying
horizontally as when it is at rest on the ground. This result is also true in moving cars. In part (b), an observer on the
ground sees a much different motion for the coin. The plane is moving so fast horizontally to begin with that its final
velocity is barely greater than the initial velocity. Once again, we see that in two dimensions, vectors do not add like
ordinary numbers—the final velocity v in part (b) isnot ; rather, it is . The velocity’s
magnitude had to be calculated to five digits to see any difference from that of the airplane. The motions as seen by
different observers (one in the plane and one on the ground) in this example are analogous to those discussed for
the binoculars dropped from the mast of a moving ship, except that the velocity of the plane is much larger, so that
the two observers seeverydifferent paths. (SeeFigure 3.46.) In addition, both observers see the coin fall 1.50 m
vertically, but the one on the ground also sees it move forward 144 m (this calculation is left for the reader). Thus,
one observer sees a vertical path, the other a nearly horizontal path.
Making Connections: Relativity and Einstein
Because Einstein was able to clearly define how measurements are made (some involve light) and because the
speed of light is the same for all observers, the outcomes are spectacularly unexpected. Time varies with
observer, energy is stored as increased mass, and more surprises await.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Motion in 2D
Try the "Motion in 2D" simulation to Learn about position, velocity, and acceleration vectors. Move the ball with the
mouse or let the simulation move the ball in four types of motion (2 types of linear, simple harmonic, circle).
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/l/motion-2d).
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 153
3 • Glossary 135
Glossary
air resistance a frictional force that slows the motion mass or force
of objects as they travel through the air; when magnitude (of a vector) the length or size of a vector;
solving basic physics problems, air resistance is magnitude is a scalar quantity
assumed to be zero motion displacement of an object as a function of
analytical method the method of determining the time
magnitude and direction of a resultant vector using projectile an object that travels through the air and
the Pythagorean theorem and trigonometric experiences only acceleration due to gravity
identities projectile motion the motion of an object that is
classical relativity the study of relative velocities in subject only to the acceleration of gravity
situations where speeds are less than about 1% of range the maximum horizontal distance that a
the speed of light—that is, less than 3000 km/s projectile travels
commutative refers to the interchangeability of order relative velocity the velocity of an object as observed
in a function; vector addition is commutative from a particular reference frame
because the order in which vectors are added relativity the study of how different observers
together does not affect the final sum moving relative to each other measure the same
component (of a 2-d vector) a piece of a vector that phenomenon
points in either the vertical or the horizontal resultant the sum of two or more vectors
direction; every 2-d vector can be expressed as a resultant vector the vector sum of two or more
sum of two vertical and horizontal vector vectors
components scalar a quantity with magnitude but no direction
direction (of a vector) the orientation of a vector in tail the start point of a vector; opposite to the head or
space tip of the arrow
head (of a vector) the end point of a vector; the trajectory the path of a projectile through the air
location of the tip of the vector’s arrowhead; also vector a quantity that has both magnitude and
referred to as the “tip” direction; an arrow used to represent quantities
head-to-tail method a method of adding vectors in with both magnitude and direction
which the tail of each vector is placed at the head of vector addition the rules that apply to adding vectors
the previous vector together
kinematics the study of motion without regard to velocity speed in a given direction
Section Summary
3.1Kinematics in Two Dimensions: An from involves adding the opposite of vector ,
Introduction which is defined as . In this case,
. Then, the head-to-tail
• The shortest path between any two points is a
method of addition is followed in the usual way to
straight line. In two dimensions, this path can be
obtain the resultant vector .
represented by a vector with horizontal and
• Addition of vectors iscommutativesuch that
vertical components.
.
• The horizontal and vertical components of a vector
• Thehead-to-tail methodof adding vectors
are independent of one another. Motion in the
involves drawing the first vector on a graph and
horizontal direction does not affect motion in the
then placing the tail of each subsequent vector at
vertical direction, and vice versa.
the head of the previous vector. The resultant
3.2Vector Addition and Subtraction: vector is then drawn from the tail of the first vector
Graphical Methods to the head of the final vector.
• If a vector is multiplied by a scalar quantity ,
• Thegraphical method of adding vectors and the magnitude of the product is given by . If is
involves drawing vectors on a graph and adding positive, the direction of the product points in the
them using the head-to-tail method. The resultant same direction as ; if is negative, the direction
vector is defined such that . The of the product points in the opposite direction as
magnitude and direction of are then determined .
with a ruler and protractor, respectively.
• Thegraphical method of subtracting vector
PAGE: 154
136 3 • Section Summary
3.3Vector Addition and Subtraction:
Analytical Methods
3. Analyze the motion of the projectile in the
• The analytical method of vector addition and
vertical direction using the following equations:
subtraction involves using the Pythagorean
theorem and trigonometric identities to determine
the magnitude and direction of a resultant vector.
• The steps to add vectors and using the
analytical method are as follows:
Step 1: Determine the coordinate system for the
vectors. Then, determine the horizontal and
vertical components of each vector using the
equations
4. Recombine the horizontal and vertical
components of location and/or velocity using
and the following equations:
Step 2: Add the horizontal and vertical
components of each vector to determine the
components and of the resultant vector, :
• The maximum height of a projectile launched
and with initial vertical velocity is given by
Step 3: Use the Pythagorean theorem to determine
• The maximum horizontal distance traveled by a
the magnitude, , of the resultant vector :
projectile is called therange. The range of a
projectile on level ground launched at an angle
above the horizontal with initial speed is given
Step 4: Use a trigonometric identity to determine
by
the direction, , of :
3.4Projectile Motion 3.5Addition of Velocities
• Projectile motion is the motion of an object • Velocities in two dimensions are added using the
through the air that is subject only to the same analytical vector techniques, which are
acceleration of gravity. rewritten as
• To solve projectile motion problems, perform the
following steps:
1. Determine a coordinate system. Then, resolve
the position and/or velocity of the object in the
horizontal and vertical components. The
components of position are given by the • Relative velocity is the velocity of an object as
quantities and , and the components of the observed from a particular reference frame, and it
velocity are given by and varies dramatically with reference frame.
, where is the magnitude of the • Relativityis the study of how different observers
velocity and is its direction. measure the same phenomenon, particularly when
2. Analyze the motion of the projectile in the the observers move relative to one another.
horizontal direction using the following Classical relativityis limited to situations where
equations: speed is less than about 1% of the speed of light
(3000km/s).
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 155
3 • Conceptual Questions 137
Conceptual Questions
3.2Vector Addition and Subtraction: 5. If an airplane pilot is told to fly 123 km in a straight
Graphical Methods line to get from San Francisco to Sacramento,
explain why he could end up anywhere on the circle
1. Which of the following is a vector: a person’s height,
shown inFigure 3.48. What other information would
the altitude on Mt. Everest, the age of the Earth, the
he need to get to Sacramento?
boiling point of water, the cost of this book, the
Earth’s population, the acceleration of gravity?
2. Give a specific example of a vector, stating its
magnitude, units, and direction.
3. What do vectors and scalars have in common? How
do they differ?
4. Two campers in a national park hike from their
cabin to the same spot on a lake, each taking a
different path, as illustrated below. The total
distance traveled along Path 1 is 7.5 km, and that
along Path 2 is 8.2 km. What is the final
displacement of each camper?
FIGURE3.48
6. Suppose you take two steps and (that is, two
nonzero displacements). Under what circumstances
FIGURE3.47
can you end up at your starting point? More
generally, under what circumstances can two
nonzero vectors add to give zero? Is the maximum
distance you can end up from the starting point
the sum of the lengths of the two steps?
7. Explain why it is not possible to add a scalar to a
vector.
8. If you take two steps of different sizes, can you end
up at your starting point? More generally, can two
vectors with different magnitudes ever add to zero?
Can three or more?
3.3Vector Addition and Subtraction:
Analytical Methods
9. Suppose you add two vectors and . What
relative direction between them produces the
resultant with the greatest magnitude? What is the
maximum magnitude? What relative direction
between them produces the resultant with the
smallest magnitude? What is the minimum
magnitude?
10. Give an example of a nonzero vector that has a
component of zero.
PAGE: 156
138 3 • Problems & Exercises
11. Explain why a vector cannot have a component 16. During a lecture demonstration, a professor places
greater than its own magnitude. two coins on the edge of a table. She then flicks
12. If the vectors and are perpendicular, what is one of the coins horizontally off the table,
the component of along the direction of ? simultaneously nudging the other over the edge.
What is the component of along the direction of Describe the subsequent motion of the two coins,
? in particular discussing whether they hit the floor
at the same time.
3.4Projectile Motion
3.5Addition of Velocities
13. Answer the following questions for projectile
motion on level ground assuming negligible air 17. What frame or frames of reference do you
resistance (the initial angle being neither nor instinctively use when driving a car? When flying in
): (a) Is the velocity ever zero? (b) When is the a commercial jet airplane?
velocity a minimum? A maximum? (c) Can the 18. A basketball player dribbling down the court
velocity ever be the same as the initial velocity at a usually keeps his eyes fixed on the players around
time other than at ? (d) Can the speed ever him. He is moving fast. Why doesn’t he need to
be the same as the initial speed at a time other keep his eyes on the ball?
than at ? 19. If someone is riding in the back of a pickup truck
14. Answer the following questions for projectile and throws a softball straight backward, is it
motion on level ground assuming negligible air possible for the ball to fall straight down as viewed
resistance (the initial angle being neither nor by a person standing at the side of the road?
): (a) Is the acceleration ever zero? (b) Is the Under what condition would this occur? How
acceleration ever in the same direction as a would the motion of the ball appear to the person
component of velocity? (c) Is the acceleration ever who threw it?
opposite in direction to a component of velocity? 20. The hat of a jogger running at constant velocity
15. For a fixed initial speed, the range of a projectile is falls off the back of his head. Draw a sketch
determined by the angle at which it is fired. For all showing the path of the hat in the jogger’s frame
but the maximum, there are two angles that give of reference. Draw its path as viewed by a
the same range. Considering factors that might stationary observer.
affect the ability of an archer to hit a target, such 21. A clod of dirt falls from the bed of a moving truck.
as wind, explain why the smaller angle (closer to It strikes the ground directly below the end of the
the horizontal) is preferable. When would it be truck. What is the direction of its velocity relative
necessary for the archer to use the larger angle? to the truck just before it hits? Is this the same as
Why does the punter in a football game use the the direction of its velocity relative to ground just
higher trajectory? before it hits? Explain your answers.
Problems & Exercises
3.2Vector Addition and Subtraction: 1. Find the following for path A inFigure 3.49: (a) the
Graphical Methods total distance traveled, and (b) the magnitude and
direction of the displacement from start to finish.
Use graphical methods to solve these problems. You
may assume data taken from graphs is accurate to
three digits.
FIGURE3.49The various lines represent paths taken by
different people walking in a city. All blocks are 120 m on a
side.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 157
3 • Problems & Exercises 139
2. Find the following for path B inFigure 3.49: (a) the 6. Repeat the problem above, but reverse the order of
total distance traveled, and (b) the magnitude and the two legs of the walk; show that you get the
direction of the displacement from start to finish. same final result. That is, you first walk leg , which
3. Find the north and east components of the is 20.0 m in a direction exactly south of west,
displacement for the hikers shown inFigure 3.47. and then leg , which is 12.0 m in a direction
4. Suppose you walk 18.0 m straight west and then exactly west of north. (This problem shows that
25.0 m straight north. How far are you from your .)
starting point, and what is the compass direction of 7. (a) Repeat the problem two problems prior, but for
a line connecting your starting point to your final the second leg you walk 20.0 m in a direction
position? (If you represent the two legs of the walk ). (b) Repeat the problem two problems prior,
as vector displacements and , as inFigure 3.50, but now you first walk 20.0 m in a direction
then this problem asks you to find their sum east of south (which is equivalent to subtracting
.) from —that is, to finding ).
Show that this is the case.
8. Show that theorderof addition of three vectors
does not affect their sum. Show this property by
choosing any three vectors , , and , all having
different lengths and directions. Find the sum
then find their sum when added in a
different order and show the result is the same.
(There are five other orders in which , , and
can be added; choose only one.)
9. Show that the sum of the vectors discussed in
Example 3.2gives the result shown inFigure 3.23.
10. Find the magnitudes of velocities and in
FIGURE3.50The two displacements and add to give a
Figure 3.52
total displacement having magnitude and direction .
5. Suppose you first walk 12.0 m in a direction
west of north and then 20.0 m in a direction
south of west. How far are you from your starting
point, and what is the compass direction of a line
connecting your starting point to your final position?
(If you represent the two legs of the walk as vector
displacements and , as inFigure 3.51, then this
problem finds their sum .)
FIGURE3.52The two velocities and add to give a
total .
11. Find the components of along thex- and
y-axes inFigure 3.52.
12. Find the components of along a set of
perpendicular axes rotated counterclockwise
relative to those inFigure 3.52.
FIGURE3.51
PAGE: 158
140 3 • Problems & Exercises
3.3Vector Addition and Subtraction: 16. Solve the following problem using analytical
Analytical Methods techniques: Suppose you walk 18.0 m straight
west and then 25.0 m straight north. How far are
13. Find the following for path C inFigure 3.53: (a) the
you from your starting point, and what is the
total distance traveled and (b) the magnitude and
compass direction of a line connecting your
direction of the displacement from start to finish.
starting point to your final position? (If you
In this part of the problem, explicitly show how
represent the two legs of the walk as vector
you follow the steps of the analytical method of
displacements and , as inFigure 3.55, then
vector addition.
this problem asks you to find their sum
.)
FIGURE3.53The various lines represent paths taken by
different people walking in a city. All blocks are 120 m on a
side.
14. Find the following for path D inFigure 3.53: (a) the
total distance traveled and (b) the magnitude and
FIGURE3.55The two displacements and add to give a
direction of the displacement from start to finish.
total displacement having magnitude and direction .
In this part of the problem, explicitly show how
Note that you can also solve this graphically.
you follow the steps of the analytical method of
Discuss why the analytical technique for solving
vector addition.
this problem is potentially more accurate than the
15. Find the north and east components of the
graphical technique.
displacement from San Francisco to Sacramento
17. RepeatExercise 3.16using analytical techniques,
shown inFigure 3.54.
but reverse the order of the two legs of the walk
and show that you get the same final result. (This
problem shows that adding them in reverse order
gives the same result—that is, .)
Discuss how taking another path to reach the
same point might help to overcome an obstacle
blocking your other path.
18. You drive in a straight line in a direction
east of north. (a) Find the distances you would
have to drive straight east and then straight north
to arrive at the same point. (This determination is
equivalent to find the components of the
displacement along the east and north directions.)
(b) Show that you still arrive at the same point if
the east and north legs are reversed in order.
19. DoExercise 3.16again using analytical techniques
and change the second leg of the walk to
FIGURE3.54 straight south. (This is equivalent to subtracting
from —that is, finding ) (b) Repeat
again, but now you first walk north and
then east. (This is equivalent to subtract
from —that is, to find . Is that
consistent with your result?)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 159
3 • Problems & Exercises 141
20. A new landowner has a triangular piece of flat land 23. In an attempt to escape his island, Gilligan builds
she wishes to fence. Starting at the west corner, a raft and sets to sea. The wind shifts a great deal
she measures the first side to be 80.0 m long and during the day, and he is blown along the following
the next to be 105 m. These sides are represented straight lines: north of west; then
as displacement vectors from inFigure 3.56. south of east; then
She then correctly calculates the length and south of west; then straight east; then
orientation of the third side . What is her result? east of north; then
south of west; and finally north of
east. What is his final position relative to the
island?
24. Suppose a pilot flies in a direction
north of east and then flies in a direction
north of east as shown inFigure 3.58. Find her
total distance from the starting point and the
direction of the straight-line path to the final
position. Discuss qualitatively how this flight
would be altered by a wind from the north and
how the effect of the wind would depend on both
wind speed and the speed of the plane relative to
the air mass.
FIGURE3.56
21. You fly in a straight line in still air in the
direction south of west. (a) Find the
distances you would have to fly straight south and
then straight west to arrive at the same point.
(This determination is equivalent to finding the
components of the displacement along the south
and west directions.) (b) Find the distances you
would have to fly first in a direction south of
west and then in a direction west of north.
These are the components of the displacement
along a different set of axes—one rotated .
FIGURE3.58
22. A farmer wants to fence off a four-sided plot of flat
land. They measure the first three sides, shown as
and inFigure 3.57, and then correctly 3.4Projectile Motion
calculate the length and orientation of the fourth
25. A projectile is launched at ground level with an
side . What is their result?
initial speed of 50.0 m/s at an angle of
above the horizontal. It strikes a target above the
ground 3.00 seconds later. What are the and
distances from where the projectile was launched
to where it lands?
26. A ball is kicked with an initial velocity of 16 m/s in
the horizontal direction and 12 m/s in the vertical
direction. (a) At what speed does the ball hit the
ground? (b) For how long does the ball remain in
the air? (c)What maximum height is attained by
the ball?
FIGURE3.57
PAGE: 160
142 3 • Problems & Exercises
27. A ball is thrown horizontally from the top of a 33. The cannon on a battleship can fire a shell a
60.0-m building and lands 100.0 m from the base maximum distance of 32.0 km. (a) Calculate the
of the building. Ignore air resistance. (a) How long initial velocity of the shell. (b) What maximum
is the ball in the air? (b) What must have been the height does it reach? (At its highest, the shell is
initial horizontal component of the velocity? (c) above 60% of the atmosphere—but air resistance
What is the vertical component of the velocity just is not really negligible as assumed to make this
before the ball hits the ground? (d) What is the problem easier.) (c) The ocean is not flat, because
velocity (including both the horizontal and vertical the Earth is curved. Assume that the radius of the
components) of the ball just before it hits the Earth is . How many meters lower
ground? will its surface be 32.0 km from the ship along a
28. (a) A daredevil is attempting to jump his horizontal line parallel to the surface at the ship?
motorcycle over a line of buses parked end to end Does your answer imply that error introduced by
by driving up a ramp at a speed of the assumption of a flat Earth in projectile motion
. How many buses can he is significant here?
clear if the top of the takeoff ramp is at the same 34. An arrow is shot from a height of 1.5 m toward a
height as the bus tops and the buses are 20.0 m cliff of height . It is shot with a velocity of 30
long? (b) Discuss what your answer implies about m/s at an angle of above the horizontal. It
the margin of error in this act—that is, consider lands on the top edge of the cliff 4.0 s later. (a)
how much greater the range is than the horizontal What is the height of the cliff? (b) What is the
distance he must travel to miss the end of the last maximum height reached by the arrow along its
bus. (Neglect air resistance.) trajectory? (c) What is the arrow’s impact speed
29. An archer shoots an arrow at a 75.0 m distant just before hitting the cliff?
target; the bull’s-eye of the target is at same 35. In the standing broad jump, one squats and then
height as the release height of the arrow. (a) At pushes off with the legs to see how far one can
what angle must the arrow be released to hit the jump. Suppose the extension of the legs from the
bull’s-eye if its initial speed is 35.0 m/s? In this crouch position is 0.600 m and the acceleration
part of the problem, explicitly show how you achieved from this position is 1.25 times the
follow the steps involved in solving projectile acceleration due to gravity, . How far can they
motion problems. (b) There is a large tree halfway jump? State your assumptions. (Increased range
between the archer and the target with an can be achieved by swinging the arms in the
overhanging horizontal branch 3.50 m above the direction of the jump.)
release height of the arrow. Will the arrow go over 36. The world long jump record is 8.95 m (Mike
or under the branch? Powell, USA, 1991). Treated as a projectile, what
30. A rugby player passes the ball 7.00 m across the is the maximum range obtainable by a person if he
field, where it is caught at the same height as it has a take-off speed of 9.5 m/s? State your
left his hand. (a) At what angle was the ball thrown assumptions.
if its initial speed was 12.0 m/s, assuming that the 37. Serving at a speed of 170 km/h, a tennis player
smaller of the two possible angles was used? (b) hits the ball at a height of 2.5 m and an angle
What other angle gives the same range, and why below the horizontal. The base line is 11.9 m from
would it not be used? (c) How long did this pass the net, which is 0.91 m high. What is the angle
take? such that the ball just crosses the net? Will the
31. Verify the ranges for the projectiles inFigure ball land in the service box, whose service line is
3.38(a) for and the given initial velocities. 6.40 m from the net?
32. Verify the ranges shown for the projectiles in 38. A football quarterback is moving straight
Figure 3.38(b) for an initial velocity of 50 m/s at backward at a speed of 2.00 m/s when he throws
the given initial angles. a pass to a player 18.0 m straight downfield. (a) If
the ball is thrown at an angle of relative to the
ground and is caught at the same height as it is
released, what is its initial speed relative to the
ground? (b) How long does it take to get to the
receiver? (c) What is its maximum height above its
point of release?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 161
3 • Problems & Exercises 143
39. Gun sights are adjusted to aim high to compensate 45. In 2007, Michael Carter (U.S.) set a world record
for the effect of gravity, effectively making the gun in the shot put with a throw of 24.77 m. What was
accurate only for a specific range. (a) If a gun is the initial speed of the shot if he released it at a
sighted to hit targets that are at the same height height of 2.10 m and threw it at an angle of
as the gun and 100.0 m away, how low will the above the horizontal? (Although the maximum
bullet hit if aimed directly at a target 150.0 m distance for a projectile on level ground is
away? The muzzle velocity of the bullet is 275 m/ achieved at when air resistance is neglected,
s. (b) Discuss qualitatively how a larger muzzle the actual angle to achieve maximum range is
velocity would affect this problem and what would smaller; thus, will give a longer range than
be the effect of air resistance. in the shot put.)
40. An eagle is flying horizontally at a speed of 3.00 46. A basketball player is running at directly
m/s when the fish in her talons wiggles loose and toward the basket when he jumps into the air to
falls into the lake 5.00 m below. Calculate the dunk the ball. He maintains his horizontal velocity.
velocity of the fish relative to the water when it (a) What vertical velocity does he need to rise
hits the water. 0.750 m above the floor? (b) How far from the
41. An owl is carrying a mouse to the chicks in its basket (measured in the horizontal direction) must
nest. Its position at that time is 4.00 m west and he start his jump to reach his maximum height at
12.0 m above the center of the 30.0 cm diameter the same time as he reaches the basket?
nest. The owl is flying east at 3.50 m/s at an angle 47. A football player punts the ball at a angle.
30.0º below the horizontal when it accidentally Without an effect from the wind, the ball would
drops the mouse. Is the owl lucky enough to have travel 60.0 m horizontally. (a) What is the initial
the mouse hit the nest? To answer this question, speed of the ball? (b) When the ball is near its
calculate the horizontal position of the mouse maximum height it experiences a brief gust of
when it has fallen 12.0 m. wind that reduces its horizontal velocity by 1.50
42. Suppose a soccer player kicks the ball from a m/s. What distance does the ball travel
distance 30 m toward the goal. Find the initial horizontally?
speed of the ball if it just passes over the goal, 2.4 48. Prove that the trajectory of a projectile is
m above the ground, given the initial direction to parabolic, having the form . To
be above the horizontal. obtain this expression, solve the equation
43. Can a goalkeeper at her/ his goal kick a soccer ball for and substitute it into the expression
into the opponent’s goal without the ball touching for (These equations describe
the ground? The distance will be about 95 m. A the and positions of a projectile that starts at
goalkeeper can give the ball a speed of 30 m/s. the origin.) You should obtain an equation of the
44. The free throw line in basketball is 4.57 m (15 ft) form where and are constants.
from the basket, which is 3.05 m (10 ft) above the
floor. A player standing on the free throw line 49. Derive for the range of a projectile
throws the ball with an initial speed of 8.15 m/s, on level ground by finding the time at which
releasing it at a height of 2.44 m (8 ft) above the becomes zero and substituting this value of into
floor. At what angle above the horizontal must the the expression for , noting that
ball be thrown to exactly hit the basket? Note that 50. Unreasonable Results(a) Find the maximum range
most players will use a large initial angle rather of a super cannon that has a muzzle velocity of 4.0
than a flat shot because it allows for a larger km/s. (b) What is unreasonable about the range
margin of error. Explicitly show how you follow the you found? (c) Is the premise unreasonable or is
steps involved in solving projectile motion the available equation inapplicable? Explain your
problems. answer. (d) If such a muzzle velocity could be
obtained, discuss the effects of air resistance,
thinning air with altitude, and the curvature of the
Earth on the range of the super cannon.
PAGE: 162
144 3 • Problems & Exercises
51. Construct Your Own ProblemConsider a ball 57. A ship sets sail from Rotterdam, The Netherlands,
tossed over a fence. Construct a problem in which heading due north at 7.00 m/s relative to the
you calculate the ball’s needed initial velocity to water. The local ocean current is 1.50 m/s in a
just clear the fence. Among the things to direction north of east. What is the velocity
determine are; the height of the fence, the of the ship relative to the Earth?
distance to the fence from the point of release of 58. (a) A jet airplane flying from Darwin, Australia, has
the ball, and the height at which the ball is an air speed of 260 m/s in a direction south of
released. You should also consider whether it is west. It is in the jet stream, which is blowing at
possible to choose the initial speed for the ball 35.0 m/s in a direction south of east. What is
and just calculate the angle at which it is thrown. the velocity of the airplane relative to the Earth?
Also examine the possibility of multiple solutions (b) Discuss whether your answers are consistent
given the distances and heights you have chosen. with your expectations for the effect of the wind
on the plane’s path.
3.5Addition of Velocities 59. (a) In what direction would the ship inExercise
3.57have to travel in order to have a velocity
52. Bryan Allen pedaled a human-powered aircraft
straight north relative to the Earth, assuming its
across the English Channel from the cliffs of Dover
speed relative to the water remains ? (b)
to Cap Gris-Nez on June 12, 1979. (a) He flew for
What would its speed be relative to the Earth?
169 min at an average velocity of 3.53 m/s in a
60. (a) Another airplane is flying in a jet stream that is
direction south of east. What was his total
blowing at 45.0 m/s in a direction south of
displacement? (b) Allen encountered a headwind
east (as inExercise 3.58). Its direction of motion
averaging 2.00 m/s almost precisely in the
relative to the Earth is south of west, while
opposite direction of his motion relative to the
its direction of travel relative to the air is
Earth. What was his average velocity relative to
south of west. What is the airplane’s speed
the air? (c) What was his total displacement
relative to the air mass? (b) What is the airplane’s
relative to the air mass?
speed relative to the Earth?
53. A seagull flies at a velocity of 9.00 m/s straight
61. A sandal is dropped from the top of a 15.0-m-high
into the wind. (a) If it takes the bird 20.0 min to
mast on a ship moving at 1.75 m/s due south.
travel 6.00 km relative to the Earth, what is the
Calculate the velocity of the sandal when it hits
velocity of the wind? (b) If the bird turns around
the deck of the ship: (a) relative to the ship and (b)
and flies with the wind, how long will he take to
relative to a stationary observer on shore. (c)
return 6.00 km? (c) Discuss how the wind affects
Discuss how the answers give a consistent result
the total round-trip time compared to what it
for the position at which the sandal hits the deck.
would be with no wind.
62. The velocity of the wind relative to the water is
54. Near the end of a marathon race, the first two
crucial to sailboats. Suppose a sailboat is in an
runners are separated by a distance of 45.0 m.
ocean current that has a velocity of 2.20 m/s in a
The front runner has a velocity of 3.50 m/s, and
direction east of north relative to the Earth.
the second a velocity of 4.20 m/s. (a) What is the
It encounters a wind that has a velocity of 4.50
velocity of the second runner relative to the first?
m/s in a direction of south of west relative to
(b) If the front runner is 250 m from the finish line,
the Earth. What is the velocity of the wind relative
who will win the race, assuming they run at
to the water?
constant velocity? (c) What distance ahead will the
winner be when she crosses the finish line?
55. Verify that the coin dropped by the airline
passenger in theExample 3.8travels 144 m
horizontally while falling 1.50 m in the frame of
reference of the Earth.
56. A football quarterback is moving straight
backward at a speed of 2.00 m/s when he throws
a pass to a player 18.0 m straight downfield. The
ball is thrown at an angle of relative to the
ground and is caught at the same height as it is
released. What is the initial velocity of the ball
relative to the quarterback?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 163
3 • Problems & Exercises 145
63. The great astronomer Edwin Hubble discovered 67. An ice hockey player is moving at 8.00 m/s when
that all distant galaxies are receding from our they hit the puck toward the goal. The speed of
Milky Way Galaxy with velocities proportional to the puck relative to the player is 29.0 m/s. The
their distances. It appears to an observer on the line between the center of the goal and the player
Earth that we are at the center of an expanding makes a angle relative to their path as
universe.Figure 3.59illustrates this for five shown inFigure 3.60. What angle must the puck’s
galaxies lying along a straight line, with the Milky velocity make relative to the player (in their frame
Way Galaxy at the center. Using the data from the of reference) to hit the center of the goal?
figure, calculate the velocities: (a) relative to
galaxy 2 and (b) relative to galaxy 5. The results
mean that observers on all galaxies will see
themselves at the center of the expanding
universe, and they would likely be aware of
relative velocities, concluding that it is not
possible to locate the center of expansion with the
FIGURE3.60An ice hockey player moving across the rink
given information. must shoot backward to give the puck a velocity toward the
goal.
68. Unreasonable ResultsSuppose you wish to shoot
supplies straight up to astronauts in an orbit
36,000 km above the surface of the Earth. (a) At
what velocity must the supplies be launched? (b)
FIGURE3.59Five galaxies on a straight line, showing their
What is unreasonable about this velocity? (c) Is
distances and velocities relative to the Milky Way (MW)
Galaxy. The distances are in millions of light years (Mly), there a problem with the relative velocity between
where a light year is the distance light travels in one year.
the supplies and the astronauts when the supplies
The velocities are nearly proportional to the distances. The
sizes of the galaxies are greatly exaggerated; an average reach their maximum height? (d) Is the premise
galaxy is about 0.1 Mly across. unreasonable or is the available equation
64. (a) Use the distance and velocity data inFigure inapplicable? Explain your answer.
3.59to find the rate of expansion as a function of 69. Unreasonable ResultsA commercial airplane has
distance. an air speed of due east and flies with a
(b) If you extrapolate back in time, how long ago strong tailwind. It travels 3000 km in a direction
would all of the galaxies have been at south of east in 1.50 h. (a) What was the
approximately the same position? The two parts of velocity of the plane relative to the ground? (b)
this problem give you some idea of how the Calculate the magnitude and direction of the
Hubble constant for universal expansion and the tailwind’s velocity. (c) What is unreasonable about
time back to the Big Bang are determined, both of these velocities? (d) Which premise is
respectively. unreasonable?
65. An athlete crosses a 25-m-wide river by 70. Construct Your Own ProblemConsider an airplane
swimming perpendicular to the water current at a headed for a runway in a cross wind. Construct a
speed of 0.5 m/s relative to the water. They reach problem in which you calculate the angle the
the opposite side at a distance 40 m downstream airplane must fly relative to the air mass in order
from the starting point. How fast is the water in to have a velocity parallel to the runway. Among
the river flowing with respect to the ground? What the things to consider are the direction of the
is the speed of the swimmer with respect to a runway, the wind speed and direction (its velocity)
friend at rest on the ground? and the speed of the plane relative to the air mass.
66. A ship sailing in the Gulf Stream is heading Also calculate the speed of the airplane relative to
west of north at a speed of 4.00 m/s relative to the the ground. Discuss any last minute maneuvers
water. Its velocity relative to the Earth is the pilot might have to perform in order for the
west of north. What is the velocity of the plane to land with its wheels pointing straight
Gulf Stream? (The velocity obtained is typical for down the runway.
the Gulf Stream a few hundred kilometers off the
east coast of the United States.)
PAGE: 164
146 3 • Problems & Exercises
71. Critical ThinkingTwo identical spring-loaded
launchers are fixed to the end of a table. Launcher
A is inclined above the horizontal and launcher
B is inclined above the horizontal. (a) Which of
these launchers will fire the ball the greatest
vertical height above the launcher before it
crashes into the ground? (b) Based on
experimental data, an equation that fits the data is
suggested for the vertical height above the
launcher,y, which may not be correct:
, whereKis a constant with
appropriate units, is the initial velocity of the
launcher, and is the angle relative to thex-axis
of the launcher. Is this equation consistent with
your answer from part a? Explain why or why not.
Does this equation make sense? Explain why or
why not. (c) Graph the magnitude of the velocity
vs. vertical height for both launcher A and B.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 165
CHAPTER 4
Dynamics: Force and Newton's Laws of Motion
FIGURE4.1Newton’s laws of motion describe the motion of the dolphin’s path. (credit: Jin Jang)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
4.1Development of Force Concept
4.2Newton’s First Law of Motion: Inertia
4.3Newton’s Second Law of Motion: Concept of a System
4.4Newton’s Third Law of Motion: Symmetry in Forces
4.5Normal, Tension, and Other Examples of Forces
4.6Problem-Solving Strategies
4.7Further Applications of Newton’s Laws of Motion
4.8Extended Topic: The Four Basic Forces—An Introduction
INTRODUCTION TO DYNAMICS: NEWTON’S LAWS OF MOTION Motion draws our attention. Motion itself can be
beautiful, causing us to marvel at the forces needed to achieve spectacular motion, such as that of a dolphin
jumping out of the water, or a pole vaulter, or the flight of a bird, or the orbit of a satellite. The study of motion is
kinematics, but kinematics onlydescribesthe way objects move—their velocity and their acceleration.Dynamics
considers the forces that affect the motion of moving objects and systems. Newton’s laws of motion are the
foundation of dynamics. These laws provide an example of the breadth and simplicity of principles under which
nature functions. They are also universal laws in that they apply to similar situations on Earth as well as in space.
Isaac Newton’s (1642–1727) laws of motion were just one part of the monumental work that has made him
legendary. The development of Newton’s laws marks the transition from the Renaissance into the modern era. This
transition was characterized by a revolutionary change in the way people thought about the physical universe. For
many centuries natural philosophers had debated the nature of the universe based largely on certain rules of logic
with great weight given to the thoughts of earlier classical philosophers such as Aristotle (384–322 BC). Among the
PAGE: 166
148 4 • Dynamics: Force and Newton's Laws of Motion
many great thinkers who contributed to this change were Newton and Galileo.
FIGURE4.2Isaac Newton’s monumental work,Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica, was published in 1687. It proposed scientific
laws that are still used today to describe the motion of objects. (credit: Service commun de la documentation de l'Université de Strasbourg)
Galileo was instrumental in establishingobservationas the absolute determinant of truth, rather than “logical”
argument. Galileo’s use of the telescope was his most notable achievement in demonstrating the importance of
observation. He discovered moons orbiting Jupiter and made other observations that were inconsistent with certain
ancient ideas and religious dogma. For this reason, and because of the manner in which he dealt with those in
authority, Galileo was tried by the Inquisition and punished. He spent the final years of his life under a form of house
arrest. Because others before Galileo had also made discoveries byobservingthe nature of the universe, and
because repeated observations verified those of Galileo, his work could not be suppressed or denied. After his
death, his work was verified by others, and his ideas were eventually accepted by the church and scientific
communities.
Galileo also contributed to the formation of what is now called Newton’s first law of motion. Newton made use of the
work of his predecessors, which enabled him to develop laws of motion, discover the law of gravity, invent calculus,
and make great contributions to the theories of light and color. It is amazing that many of these developments were
made with Newton working alone, without the benefit of the usual interactions that take place among scientists
today.
It was not until the advent of modern physics early in the 20th century that it was discovered that Newton’s laws of
motion produce a good approximation to motion only when the objects are moving at speeds much, much less than
the speed of light and when those objects are larger than the size of most molecules (about in diameter).
These constraints define the realm of classical mechanics, as discussed inIntroduction to the Nature of Science and
Physics. At the beginning of the 20thcentury, Albert Einstein (1879–1955) developed the theory of relativity and,
along with many other scientists, developed quantum theory. This theory does not have the constraints present in
classical physics. All of the situations we consider in this chapter, and all those preceding the introduction of
relativity inSpecial Relativity, are in the realm of classical physics.
Making Connections: Past and Present Philosophy
The importance of observationand the concept ofcause and effectwere not always so entrenched in human
thinking. This realization was a part of the evolution of modern physics from natural philosophy. The
achievements of Galileo, Newton, Einstein, and others were key milestones in the history of scientific thought.
Most of the scientific theories that are described in this book descended from the work of these scientists.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/4-introduction-to-dynamics-newtons-
laws-of-motion)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 167
4.1 • Development of Force Concept 149
4.1 Development of Force Concept
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Understand the definition of force.
Dynamicsis the study of the forces that cause objects and systems to move. To understand this, we need a working
definition of force. Our intuitive definition offorce—that is, a push or a pull—is a good place to start. We know that a
push or pull has both magnitude and direction (therefore, it is a vector quantity) and can vary considerably in each
regard. For example, a cannon exerts a strong force on a cannonball that is launched into the air. In contrast, Earth
exerts only a tiny downward pull on a flea. Our everyday experiences also give us a good idea of how multiple forces
add. If two people push in different directions on a third person, as illustrated inFigure 4.3, we might expect the
total force to be in the direction shown. Since force is a vector, it adds just like other vectors, as illustrated inFigure
4.3(a) for two ice skaters. Forces, like other vectors, are represented by arrows and can be added using the familiar
head-to-tail method or by trigonometric methods. These ideas were developed inTwo-Dimensional Kinematics.
FIGURE4.3Part (a) shows an overhead view of two ice skaters pushing on a third. Forces are vectors and add like other vectors, so the
total force on the third skater is in the direction shown. In part (b), we see a free-body diagram representing the forces acting on the third
skater.
Figure 4.3(b) is our first example of afree-body diagram, which is a technique used to illustrate all theexternal
forcesacting on a body. The body is represented by a single isolated point (or free body), and only those forces
actingonthe body from the outside (external forces) are shown. (These forces are the only ones shown, because
only external forces acting on the body affect its motion. We can ignore any internal forces within the body.) Free-
body diagrams are very useful in analyzing forces acting on a system and are employed extensively in the study and
application of Newton’s laws of motion.
A more quantitative definition of force can be based on some standard force, just as distance is measured in units
relative to a standard distance. One possibility is to stretch a spring a certain fixed distance, as illustrated inFigure
4.4, and use the force it exerts to pull itself back to its relaxed shape—called arestoring force—as a standard. The
magnitude of all other forces can be stated as multiples of this standard unit of force. Many other possibilities exist
for standard forces. (One that we will encounter inMagnetismis the magnetic force between two wires carrying
electric current.) Some alternative definitions of force will be given later in this chapter.
FIGURE4.4The force exerted by a stretched spring can be used as a standard unit of force. (a) This spring has a length when undistorted.
(b) When stretched a distance , the spring exerts a restoring force, , which is reproducible. (c) A spring scale is one device that
uses a spring to measure force. The force is exerted on whatever is attached to the hook. Here has a magnitude of 6 units in
the force standard being employed.
PAGE: 168
150 4 • Dynamics: Force and Newton's Laws of Motion
Take-Home Experiment: Force Standards
To investigate force standards and cause and effect, get two identical rubber bands. Hang one rubber band
vertically on a hook. Find a small household item that could be attached to the rubber band using a paper clip,
and use this item as a weight to investigate the stretch of the rubber band. Measure the amount of stretch
produced in the rubber band with one, two, and four of these (identical) items suspended from the rubber band.
What is the relationship between the number of items and the amount of stretch? How large a stretch would you
expect for the same number of items suspended from two rubber bands? What happens to the amount of
stretch of the rubber band (with the weights attached) if the weights are also pushed to the side with a pencil?
4.2 Newton’s First Law of Motion: Inertia
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define mass and inertia.
• Understand Newton's first law of motion.
Experience suggests that an object at rest will remain at rest if left alone, and that an object in motion tends to slow
down and stop unless some effort is made to keep it moving. WhatNewton’s first law of motionstates, however, is
the following:
Newton’s First Law of Motion
A body at rest remains at rest, or, if in motion, remains in motion at a constant velocity unless acted on by a net
external force.
Note the repeated use of the verb “remains.” We can think of this law as preserving the status quo of motion.
Rather than contradicting our experience,Newton’s first law of motionstates that there must be acause(which is
a net external force)for there to be any change in velocity (either a change in magnitude or direction). We will define
net external forcein the next section. An object sliding across a table or floor slows down due to the net force of
friction acting on the object. If friction disappeared, would the object still slow down?
The idea of cause and effect is crucial in accurately describing what happens in various situations. For example,
consider what happens to an object sliding along a rough horizontal surface. The object quickly grinds to a halt. If we
spray the surface with talcum powder to make the surface smoother, the object slides farther. If we make the
surface even smoother by rubbing lubricating oil on it, the object slides farther yet. Extrapolating to a frictionless
surface, we can imagine the object sliding in a straight line indefinitely. Friction is thus thecauseof the slowing
(consistent with Newton’s first law). The object would not slow down at all if friction were completely eliminated.
Consider an air hockey table. When the air is turned off, the puck slides only a short distance before friction slows it
to a stop. However, when the air is turned on, it creates a nearly frictionless surface, and the puck glides long
distances without slowing down. Additionally, if we know enough about the friction, we can accurately predict how
quickly the object will slow down. Friction is an external force.
Newton’s first law is completely general and can be applied to anything from an object sliding on a table to a
satellite in orbit to blood pumped from the heart. Experiments have thoroughly verified that any change in velocity
(speed or direction) must be caused by an external force. The idea ofgenerally applicable or universal lawsis
important not only here—it is a basic feature of all laws of physics. Identifying these laws is like recognizing patterns
in nature from which further patterns can be discovered. The genius of Galileo, who first developed the idea for the
first law, and Newton, who clarified it, was to ask the fundamental question, “What is the cause?” Thinking in terms
of cause and effect is a worldview fundamentally different from the typical ancient Greek approach when questions
such as “Why does a tiger have stripes?” would have been answered in Aristotelian fashion, “That is the nature of
the beast.” True perhaps, but not a useful insight.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 169
4.3 • Newton’s Second Law of Motion: Concept of a System 151
Mass
The property of a body to remain at rest or to remain in motion with constant velocity is calledinertia. Newton’s first
law is often called thelaw of inertia. As we know from experience, some objects have more inertia than others. It is
obviously more difficult to change the motion of a large boulder than that of a basketball, for example. The inertia of
an object is measured by itsmass. Roughly speaking, mass is a measure of the amount of “stuff” (or matter) in
something. The quantity or amount of matter in an object is determined by the numbers of atoms and molecules of
various types it contains. Unlike weight, mass does not vary with location. The mass of an object is the same on
Earth, in orbit, or on the surface of the Moon. In practice, it is very difficult to count and identify all of the atoms and
molecules in an object, so masses are not often determined in this manner. Operationally, the masses of objects are
determined by comparison with the standard kilogram.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Which has more mass: a kilogram of cotton balls or a kilogram of gold?
Solution
They are equal. A kilogram of one substance is equal in mass to a kilogram of another substance. The quantities that
might differ between them are volume and density.
4.3 Newton’s Second Law of Motion: Concept of a System
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define net force, external force, and system.
• Understand Newton’s second law of motion.
• Apply Newton’s second law to determine the weight of an object.
Newton’s second law of motionis closely related to Newton’s first law of motion. It mathematically states the
cause and effect relationship between force and changes in motion. Newton’s second law of motion is more
quantitative and is used extensively to calculate what happens in situations involving a force. Before we can write
down Newton’s second law as a simple equation giving the exact relationship of force, mass, and acceleration, we
need to sharpen some ideas that have already been mentioned.
First, what do we mean by a change in motion? The answer is that a change in motion is equivalent to a change in
velocity. A change in velocity means, by definition, that there is anacceleration. Newton’s first law says that a net
external force causes a change in motion; thus, we see that anet external force causes acceleration.
Another question immediately arises. What do we mean by an external force? An intuitive notion of external is
correct—anexternal forceacts from outside thesystemof interest. For example, inFigure 4.5(a) the system of
interest is the wagon plus the child in it. The two forces exerted by the other children are external forces. An internal
force acts between elements of the system. Again looking atFigure 4.5(a), the force the child in the wagon exerts to
hang onto the wagon is an internal force between elements of the system of interest. Only external forces affect the
motion of a system, according to Newton’s first law. (The internal forces actually cancel, as we shall see in the next
section.)You must define the boundaries of the system before you can determine which forces are external.
Sometimes the system is obvious, whereas other times identifying the boundaries of a system is more subtle. The
concept of a system is fundamental to many areas of physics, as is the correct application of Newton’s laws. This
concept will be revisited many times on our journey through physics.
PAGE: 170
152 4 • Dynamics: Force and Newton's Laws of Motion
FIGURE4.5Different forces exerted on the same mass produce different accelerations. (a) Two children push a wagon with a child in it.
Arrows representing all external forces are shown. The system of interest is the wagon and its rider. The weight of the system and the
support of the ground are also shown for completeness and are assumed to cancel. The vector represents the friction acting on the
wagon, and it acts to the left, opposing the motion of the wagon. (b) All of the external forces acting on the system add together to produce
a net force, . The free-body diagram shows all of the forces acting on the system of interest. The dot represents the center of mass of
the system. Each force vector extends from this dot. Because there are two forces acting to the right, we draw the vectors collinearly. (c) A
larger net external force produces a larger acceleration ( ) when an adult pushes the child.
Now, it seems reasonable that acceleration should be directly proportional to and in the same direction as the net
(total) external force acting on a system. This assumption has been verified experimentally and is illustrated in
Figure 4.5. In part (a), a smaller force causes a smaller acceleration than the larger force illustrated in part (c). For
completeness, the vertical forces are also shown; they are assumed to cancel since there is no acceleration in the
vertical direction. The vertical forces are the weight and the support of the ground , and the horizontal force
represents the force of friction. These will be discussed in more detail in later sections. For now, we will define
frictionas a force that opposes the motion past each other of objects that are touching.Figure 4.5(b) shows how
vectors representing the external forces add together to produce a net force, .
To obtain an equation for Newton’s second law, we first write the relationship of acceleration and net external force
as the proportionality
4.1
where the symbol means “proportional to,” and is thenet external force. (The net external force is the
vector sum of all external forces and can be determined graphically, using the head-to-tail method, or analytically,
using components. The techniques are the same as for the addition of other vectors, and are covered inTwo-
Dimensional Kinematics.) This proportionality states what we have said in words—acceleration is directly
proportional to the net external force. Once the system of interest is chosen, it is important to identify the external
forces and ignore the internal ones. It is a tremendous simplification not to have to consider the numerous internal
forces acting between objects within the system, such as muscular forces within the child’s body, let alone the
myriad of forces between atoms in the objects, but by doing so, we can easily solve some very complex problems
with only minimal error due to our simplification
Now, it also seems reasonable that acceleration should be inversely proportional to the mass of the system. In other
words, the larger the mass (the inertia), the smaller the acceleration produced by a given force. And indeed, as
illustrated inFigure 4.6, the same net external force applied to a car produces a much smaller acceleration than
when applied to a basketball. The proportionality is written as
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 171
4.3 • Newton’s Second Law of Motion: Concept of a System 153
4.2
where is the mass of the system. Experiments have shown that acceleration is exactly inversely proportional to
mass, just as it is exactly linearly proportional to the net external force.
FIGURE4.6The same force exerted on systems of different masses produces different accelerations. (a) A basketball player pushes on a
basketball to make a pass. (The effect of gravity on the ball is ignored.) (b) The same player exerts an identical force on a stalled SUV and
produces a far smaller acceleration (even if friction is negligible). (c) The free-body diagrams are identical, permitting direct comparison of
the two situations. A series of patterns for the free-body diagram will emerge as you do more problems.
It has been found that the acceleration of an object dependsonlyon the net external force and the mass of the
object. Combining the two proportionalities just given yields Newton's second law of motion.
Newton’s Second Law of Motion
The acceleration of a system is directly proportional to and in the same direction as the net external force acting
on the system, and inversely proportional to its mass.
In equation form, Newton’s second law of motion is
4.3
This is often written in the more familiar form
4.4
When only the magnitude of force and acceleration are considered, this equation is simply
4.5
Although these last two equations are really the same, the first gives more insight into what Newton’s second law
means. The law is acause and effect relationshipamong three quantities that is not simply based on their
definitions. The validity of the second law is completely based on experimental verification.
Units of Force
is used to define the units of force in terms of the three basic units for mass, length, and time. The SI unit
of force is called thenewton(abbreviated N) and is the force needed to accelerate a 1-kg system at the rate of
. That is, since ,
4.6
While almost the entire world uses the newton for the unit of force, in the United States the most familiar unit of
force is the pound (lb), where 1 N = 0.225 lb.
Weight and the Gravitational Force
When an object is dropped, it accelerates toward the center of Earth. Newton’s second law states that a net force on
an object is responsible for its acceleration. If air resistance is negligible, the net force on a falling object is the
PAGE: 172
154 4 • Dynamics: Force and Newton's Laws of Motion
gravitational force, commonly called itsweight . Weight can be denoted as a vector because it has a direction;
downis, by definition, the direction of gravity, and hence weight is a downward force. The magnitude of weight is
denoted as .Galileo was instrumental in showing that, in the absence of air resistance, all objects fall with the
same acceleration . Using Galileo’s result and Newton’s second law, we can derive an equation for weight.
Consider an object with mass falling downward toward Earth. It experiences only the downward force of gravity,
which has magnitude . Newton’s second law states that the magnitude of the net external force on an object is
.
Since the object experiences only the downward force of gravity, . We know that the acceleration of an
object due to gravity is , or . Substituting these into Newton’s second law gives
Weight
This is the equation forweight—the gravitational force on a mass :
4.7
Since on Earth, the weight of a 1.0 kg object on Earth is 9.8 N, as we see:
4.8
Recall that can take a positive or negative value, depending on the positive direction in the coordinate system.
Be sure to take this into consideration when solving problems with weight.
When the net external force on an object is its weight, we say that it is infree-fall. That is, the only force acting on
the object is the force of gravity. In the real world, when objects fall downward toward Earth, they are never truly in
free-fall because there is always some upward force from the air acting on the object.
The acceleration due to gravity varies slightly over the surface of Earth, so that the weight of an object depends on
location and is not an intrinsic property of the object. Weight varies dramatically if one leaves Earth’s surface. On the
Moon, for example, the acceleration due to gravity is only . A 1.0-kg mass thus has a weight of 9.8 N on
Earth and only about 1.7 N on the Moon.
The broadest definition of weight in this sense is thatthe weight of an object is the gravitational force on it from the
nearest large body, such as Earth, the Moon, the Sun, and so on. This is the most common and useful definition of
weight in physics. It differs dramatically, however, from the definition of weight used by NASA and the popular
media in relation to space travel and exploration. When they speak of “weightlessness” and “microgravity,” they are
really referring to the phenomenon we call “free-fall” in physics. We shall use the above definition of weight, and we
will make careful distinctions between free-fall and actual weightlessness.
It is important to be aware that weight and mass are very different physical quantities, although they are closely
related. Mass is the quantity of matter (how much “stuff”) and does not vary in classical physics, whereas weight is
the gravitational force and does vary depending on gravity. It is tempting to equate the two, since most of our
examples take place on Earth, where the weight of an object only varies a little with the location of the object.
Furthermore, the termsmassandweightare used interchangeably in everyday language; for example, our medical
records often show our “weight” in kilograms, but never in the correct units of newtons.
Common Misconceptions: Mass vs. Weight
Mass and weight are often used interchangeably in everyday language. However, in science, these terms are
distinctly different from one another. Mass is a measure of how much matter is in an object. The typical measure
of mass is the kilogram (or the “slug” in English units). Weight, on the other hand, is a measure of the force of
gravity acting on an object. Weight is equal to the mass of an object ( ) multiplied by the acceleration due to
gravity ( ). Like any other force, weight is measured in terms of newtons (or pounds in English units).
Assuming the mass of an object is kept intact, it will remain the same, regardless of its location. However,
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 173
4.3 • Newton’s Second Law of Motion: Concept of a System 155
because weight depends on the acceleration due to gravity, the weight of an objectcan changewhen the object
enters into a region with stronger or weaker gravity. For example, the acceleration due to gravity on the Moon is
(which is much less than the acceleration due to gravity on Earth, ). If you measured your
weight on Earth and then measured your weight on the Moon, you would find that you “weigh” much less, even
though you do not look any skinnier. This is because the force of gravity is weaker on the Moon. In fact, when
people say that they are “losing weight,” they really mean that they are losing “mass” (which in turn causes
them to weigh less).
Take-Home Experiment: Mass and Weight
What do bathroom scales measure? When you stand on a bathroom scale, what happens to the scale? It
depresses slightly. The scale contains springs that compress in proportion to your weight—similar to rubber
bands expanding when pulled. The springs provide a measure of your weight (for an object which is not
accelerating). This is a force in newtons (or pounds). In most countries, the measurement is divided by 9.80 to
give a reading in mass units of kilograms. The scale measures weight but is calibrated to provide information
about mass. While standing on a bathroom scale, push down on a table next to you. What happens to the
reading? Why? Would your scale measure the same “mass” on Earth as on the Moon?
EXAMPLE 4.1
What Acceleration Can a Person Produce when Pushing a Lawn Mower?
Suppose that the net external force (push minus friction) exerted on a lawn mower is 51 N (about 11 lb) parallel to
the ground. The mass of the mower is 24 kg. What is its acceleration?
FIGURE4.7The net force on a lawn mower is 51 N to the right. At what rate does the lawn mower accelerate to the right?
Strategy
Since and are given, the acceleration can be calculated directly from Newton’s second law as stated in
.
Solution
The magnitude of the acceleration is . Entering known values gives
4.9
Substituting the units for N yields
PAGE: 174
156 4 • Dynamics: Force and Newton's Laws of Motion
4.10
Discussion
The direction of the acceleration is the same direction as that of the net force, which is parallel to the ground. There
is no information given in this example about the individual external forces acting on the system, but we can say
something about their relative magnitudes. For example, the force exerted by the person pushing the mower must
be greater than the friction opposing the motion (since we know the mower moves forward), and the vertical forces
must cancel if there is to be no acceleration in the vertical direction (the mower is moving only horizontally). The
acceleration found is small enough to be reasonable for a person pushing a mower. Such an effort would not last too
long because the person’s top speed would soon be reached.
EXAMPLE 4.2
What Rocket Thrust Accelerates This Sled?
Prior to space flights carrying astronauts, rocket sleds were used to test aircraft, missile equipment, and
physiological effects on human subjects at high speeds. They consisted of a platform that was mounted on one or
two rails and propelled by several rockets. Calculate the magnitude of force exerted by each rocket, called its thrust
, for the four-rocket propulsion system shown inFigure 4.8. The sled’s initial acceleration is the mass of
the system is 2100 kg, and the force of friction opposing the motion is known to be 650 N.
FIGURE4.8A sled experiences a rocket thrust that accelerates it to the right. Each rocket creates an identical thrust . As in other
situations where there is only horizontal acceleration, the vertical forces cancel. The ground exerts an upward force on the system that is
equal in magnitude and opposite in direction to its weight, . The system here is the sled, its rockets, and rider, so none of the forces
betweenthese objects are considered. The arrow representing friction ( ) is drawn larger than scale.
Strategy
Although there are forces acting vertically and horizontally, we assume the vertical forces cancel since there is no
vertical acceleration. This leaves us with only horizontal forces and a simpler one-dimensional problem. Directions
are indicated with plus or minus signs, with right taken as the positive direction. See the free-body diagram in the
figure.
Solution
Since acceleration, mass, and the force of friction are given, we start with Newton’s second law and look for ways to
find the thrust of the engines. Since we have defined the direction of the force and acceleration as acting “to the
right,” we need to consider only the magnitudes of these quantities in the calculations. Hence we begin with
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 175
4.4 • Newton’s Third Law of Motion: Symmetry in Forces 157
4.11
where is the net force along the horizontal direction. We can see fromFigure 4.8that the engine thrusts add,
while friction opposes the thrust. In equation form, the net external force is
4.12
Substituting this into Newton’s second law gives
4.13
Using a little algebra, we solve for the total thrust 4T:
4.14
Substituting known values yields
4.15
So the total thrust is
4.16
and the individual thrusts are
4.17
Discussion
The numbers are quite large, so the result might surprise you. Experiments such as this were performed in the early
1960s to test the limits of human endurance and the setup designed to protect human subjects in jet fighter
emergency ejections. Speeds of 1000 km/h were obtained, with accelerations of 45 's. (Recall that , the
acceleration due to gravity, is . When we say that an acceleration is 45 's, it is × , which is
approximately .) While living subjects are not used any more, land speeds of 10,000 km/h have been
obtained with rocket sleds. In this example, as in the preceding one, the system of interest is obvious. We will see in
later examples that choosing the system of interest is crucial—and the choice is not always obvious.
Newton’s second law of motion is more than a definition; it is a relationship among acceleration, force, and mass. It
can help us make predictions. Each of those physical quantities can be defined independently, so the second law
tells us something basic and universal about nature. The next section introduces the third and final law of motion.
4.4 Newton’s Third Law of Motion: Symmetry in Forces
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Understand Newton's third law of motion.
• Apply Newton's third law to define systems and solve problems of motion.
Baseball relief pitcher Mariano Rivera was so highly regarded that during his retirement year, opposing teams
conducted farewell presentations when he played at their stadiums. The Minnesota Twins offered a unique gift: A
chair made of broken bats. Any pitch can break a bat, but with Rivera's signature pitch—known as a cutter—the ball
and the bat frequently came together at a point that shattered the hardwood. Typically, we think of a baseball or
softball hitter exerting a force on the incoming ball, and baseball analysts focus on the resulting "exit velocity" as a
key statistic. But the force of the ball can do its own damage. This is exactly what happens whenever one body
exerts a force on another—the first also experiences a force (equal in magnitude and opposite in direction).
Numerous common experiences, such as stubbing a toe or pushing off the floor during a jump, confirm this. It is
precisely stated inNewton’s third law of motion.
PAGE: 176
158 4 • Dynamics: Force and Newton's Laws of Motion
Newton’s Third Law of Motion
Whenever one body exerts a force on a second body, the first body experiences a force that is equal in
magnitude and opposite in direction to the force that it exerts.
This law represents a certainsymmetry in nature: Forces always occur in pairs, and one body cannot exert a force on
another without experiencing a force itself. We sometimes refer to this law loosely as “action-reaction,” where the
force exerted is the action and the force experienced as a consequence is the reaction. Newton’s third law has
practical uses in analyzing the origin of forces and understanding which forces are external to a system.
We can readily see Newton’s third law at work by taking a look at how people move about. Consider a swimmer
pushing off from the side of a pool, as illustrated inFigure 4.9. She pushes against the pool wall with her feet and
accelerates in the directionoppositeto that of her push. The wall has exerted an equal and opposite force back on
the swimmer. You might think that two equal and opposite forces would cancel, but they do notbecause they act on
different systems. In this case, there are two systems that we could investigate: the swimmer or the wall. If we
select the swimmer to be the system of interest, as in the figure, then is an external force on this system
and affects its motion. The swimmer moves in the direction of . In contrast, the force acts
on the wall and not on our system of interest. Thus does not directly affect the motion of the system and
does not cancel . Note that the swimmer pushes in the direction opposite to that in which she wishes to
move. The reaction to her push is thus in the desired direction.
FIGURE4.9When the swimmer exerts a force on the wall, she accelerates in the direction opposite to that of her push. This
means the net external force on her is in the direction opposite to . This opposition occurs because, in accordance with
Newton’s third law of motion, the wall exerts a force on her, equal in magnitude but in the direction opposite to the one she
exerts on it. The line around the swimmer indicates the system of interest. Note that does not act on this system (the swimmer)
and, thus, does not cancel . Thus the free-body diagram shows only , , the gravitational force, and , the
buoyant force of the water supporting the swimmer’s weight. The vertical forces and cancel since there is no vertical motion.
Other examples of Newton’s third law are easy to find. As a professor walks in front of a whiteboard, she exerts a
force backward on the floor. The floor exerts a reaction force forward on the professor that causes her to accelerate
forward. Similarly, a car accelerates because the ground pushes forward on the drive wheels in reaction to the drive
wheels pushing backward on the ground. You can see evidence of the wheels pushing backward when tires spin on a
gravel road and throw rocks backward. In another example, rockets move forward by expelling gas backward at high
velocity. This means the rocket exerts a large backward force on the gas in the rocket combustion chamber, and the
gas therefore exerts a large reaction force forward on the rocket. This reaction force is calledthrust. It is a common
misconception that rockets propel themselves by pushing on the ground or on the air behind them. They actually
work better in a vacuum, where they can more readily expel the exhaust gases. Helicopters similarly create lift by
pushing air down, thereby experiencing an upward reaction force. Birds and airplanes also fly by exerting force on air
in a direction opposite to that of whatever force they need. For example, the wings of a bird force air downward and
backward in order to get lift and move forward. An octopus propels itself in the water by ejecting water through a
funnel from its body, similar to a jet ski. Boxers and other martial arts fighters experience reaction forces when they
punch, sometimes breaking their hand by hitting an opponent’s body.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 177
4.4 • Newton’s Third Law of Motion: Symmetry in Forces 159
EXAMPLE 4.3
Getting Up To Speed: Choosing the Correct System
A physics professor pushes a cart of demonstration equipment to a lecture hall, as seen inFigure 4.10. Her mass is
65.0 kg, the cart’s is 12.0 kg, and the equipment’s is 7.0 kg. Calculate the acceleration produced when the professor
exerts a backward force of 150 N on the floor. All forces opposing the motion, such as friction on the cart’s wheels
and air resistance, total 24.0 N.
FIGURE4.10A professor pushes a cart of demonstration equipment. The lengths of the arrows are proportional to the magnitudes of the
forces (except for , since it is too small to draw to scale). Different questions are asked in each example; thus, the system of interest must
be defined differently for each. System 1 is appropriate for this example, since it asks for the acceleration of the entire group of objects.
Only and are external forces acting on System 1 along the line of motion. All other forces either cancel or act on the outside world.
System 2 is chosen forExample 4.4so that will be an external force and enter into Newton’s second law. Note that the free-body
diagrams, which allow us to apply Newton’s second law, vary with the system chosen.
Strategy
Since they accelerate as a unit, we define the system to be the professor, cart, and equipment. This is System 1 in
Figure 4.10. The professor pushes backward with a force of 150 N. According to Newton’s third law, the floor
exerts a forward reaction force of 150 N on System 1. Because all motion is horizontal, we can assume there
is no net force in the vertical direction. The problem is therefore one-dimensional along the horizontal direction. As
noted, opposes the motion and is thus in the opposite direction of . Note that we do not include the forces
or because these are internal forces, and we do not include because it acts on the floor, not on the
system. There are no other significant forces acting on System 1. If the net external force can be found from all this
information, we can use Newton’s second law to find the acceleration as requested. See the free-body diagram in
the figure.
Solution
Newton’s second law is given by
4.18
The net external force on System 1 is deduced fromFigure 4.10and the discussion above to be
4.19
The mass of System 1 is
PAGE: 178
160 4 • Dynamics: Force and Newton's Laws of Motion
4.20
These values of and produce an acceleration of
4.21
Discussion
None of the forces between components of System 1, such as between the professor’s hands and the cart,
contribute to the net external force because they are internal to System 1. Another way to look at this is to note that
forces between components of a system cancel because they are equal in magnitude and opposite in direction. For
example, the force exerted by the professor on the cart results in an equal and opposite force back on her. In this
case both forces act on the same system and, therefore, cancel. Thus internal forces (between components of a
system) cancel. Choosing System 1 was crucial to solving this problem.
EXAMPLE 4.4
Force on the Cart—Choosing a New System
Calculate the force the professor exerts on the cart inFigure 4.10using data from the previous example if needed.
Strategy
If we now define the system of interest to be the cart plus equipment (System 2 inFigure 4.10), then the net
external force on System 2 is the force the professor exerts on the cart minus friction. The force she exerts on the
cart, , is an external force acting on System 2. was internal to System 1, but it is external to System 2 and
will enter Newton’s second law for System 2.
Solution
Newton’s second law can be used to find . Starting with
4.22
and noting that the magnitude of the net external force on System 2 is
4.23
we solve for , the desired quantity:
4.24
The value of is given, so we must calculate net . That can be done since both the acceleration and mass of
System 2 are known. Using Newton’s second law we see that
4.25
where the mass of System 2 is 19.0 kg ( = 12.0 kg + 7.0 kg) and its acceleration was found to be in
the previous example. Thus,
4.26
4.27
Now we can find the desired force:
4.28
4.29
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 179
4.5 • Normal, Tension, and Other Examples of Forces 161
Discussion
It is interesting that this force is significantly less than the 150-N force the professor exerted backward on the floor.
Not all of that 150-N force is transmitted to the cart; some of it accelerates the professor.
The choice of a system is an important analytical step both in solving problems and in thoroughly understanding the
physics of the situation (which is not necessarily the same thing).
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Gravity Force Lab
Visualize the gravitational force that two objects exert on each other. Change properties of the objects in order to
see how it changes the gravity force.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/4-4-newtons-third-law-of-motion-
symmetry-in-forces)
4.5 Normal, Tension, and Other Examples of Forces
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define normal and tension forces.
• Apply Newton's laws of motion to solve problems involving a variety of forces.
• Use trigonometric identities to resolve weight into components.
Forces are given many names, such as push, pull, thrust, lift, weight, friction, and tension. Traditionally, forces have
been grouped into several categories and given names relating to their source, how they are transmitted, or their
effects. The most important of these categories are discussed in this section, together with some interesting
applications. Further examples of forces are discussed later in this text.
Normal Force
Weight(also called force of gravity) is a pervasive force that acts at all times and must be counteracted to keep an
object from falling. You definitely notice that you must support the weight of a heavy object by pushing up on it when
you hold it stationary, as illustrated inFigure 4.11(a). But how do inanimate objects like a table support the weight
of a mass placed on them, such as shown inFigure 4.11(b)? When the bag of dog food is placed on the table, the
table actually sags slightly under the load. This would be noticeable if the load were placed on a card table, but even
rigid objects deform when a force is applied to them. Unless the object is deformed beyond its limit, it will exert a
restoring force much like a deformed spring (or trampoline or diving board). The greater the deformation, the greater
the restoring force. So when the load is placed on the table, the table sags until the restoring force becomes as large
as the weight of the load. At this point the net external force on the load is zero. That is the situation when the load
is stationary on the table. The table sags quickly, and the sag is slight so we do not notice it. But it is similar to the
sagging of a trampoline when you climb onto it.
PAGE: 180
162 4 • Dynamics: Force and Newton's Laws of Motion
FIGURE4.11(a) The person holding the bag of dog food must supply an upward force equal in magnitude and opposite in direction
to the weight of the food . (b) The card table sags when the dog food is placed on it, much like a stiff trampoline. Elastic restoring forces in
the table grow as it sags until they supply a force equal in magnitude and opposite in direction to the weight of the load.
We must conclude that whatever supports a load, be it animate or not, must supply an upward force equal to the
weight of the load, as we assumed in a few of the previous examples. If the force supporting a load is perpendicular
to the surface of contact between the load and its support, this force is defined to be anormal forceand here is
given the symbol . (This is not the unit for force N.) The wordnormalmeans perpendicular to a surface. The normal
force can be less than the object’s weight if the object is on an incline, as you will see in the next example.
Common Misconception: Normal Force (N) vs. Newton (N)
In this section we have introduced the quantity normal force, which is represented by the variable . This
should not be confused with the symbol for the newton, which is also represented by the letter N. These
symbols are particularly important to distinguish because the units of a normal force ( ) happen to be newtons
(N). For example, the normal force that the floor exerts on a chair might be . One important
difference is that normal force is a vector, while the newton is simply a unit. Be careful not to confuse these
letters in your calculations! You will encounter more similarities among variables and units as you proceed in
physics. Another example of this is the quantity work ( ) and the unit watts (W).
EXAMPLE 4.5
Weight on an Incline, a Two-Dimensional Problem
Consider the skier on a slope shown inFigure 4.12. Her mass including equipment is 60.0 kg. (a) What is her
acceleration if friction is negligible? (b) What is her acceleration if friction is known to be 45.0 N?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 181
4.5 • Normal, Tension, and Other Examples of Forces 163
FIGURE4.12Since motion and friction are parallel to the slope, it is most convenient to project all forces onto a coordinate system where
one axis is parallel to the slope and the other is perpendicular (axes shown to left of skier). is perpendicular to the slope andfis parallel
to the slope, but has components along both axes, namely and . is equal in magnitude to , so that there is no motion
perpendicular to the slope, but is less than , so that there is a downslope acceleration (along the parallel axis).
Strategy
This is a two-dimensional problem, since the forces on the skier (the system of interest) are not parallel. The
approach we have used in two-dimensional kinematics also works very well here. Choose a convenient coordinate
system and project the vectors onto its axes, creatingtwoconnectedone-dimensional problems to solve. The most
convenient coordinate system for motion on an incline is one that has one coordinate parallel to the slope and one
perpendicular to the slope. (Remember that motions along mutually perpendicular axes are independent.) We use
the symbols and to represent perpendicular and parallel, respectively. This choice of axes simplifies this type of
problem, because there is no motion perpendicular to the slope and because friction is always parallel to the
surface between two objects. The only external forces acting on the system are the skier’s weight, friction, and the
support of the slope, respectively labeled , , and inFigure 4.12. is always perpendicular to the slope, and is
parallel to it. But is not in the direction of either axis, and so the first step we take is to project it into components
along the chosen axes, defining to be the component of weight parallel to the slope and the component of
weight perpendicular to the slope. Once this is done, we can consider the two separate problems of forces parallel
to the slope and forces perpendicular to the slope.
Solution
The magnitude of the component of the weight parallel to the slope is , and the
magnitude of the component of the weight perpendicular to the slope is .
(a) Neglecting friction. Since the acceleration is parallel to the slope, we need only consider forces parallel to the
slope. (Forces perpendicular to the slope add to zero, since there is no acceleration in that direction.) The forces
parallel to the slope are the amount of the skier’s weight parallel to the slope and friction . Using Newton’s
second law, with subscripts to denote quantities parallel to the slope,
4.30
where , assuming no friction for this part, so that
4.31
4.32
is the acceleration.
(b) Including friction. We now have a given value for friction, and we know its direction is parallel to the slope and it
opposes motion between surfaces in contact. So the net external force is now
4.33
PAGE: 182
164 4 • Dynamics: Force and Newton's Laws of Motion
and substituting this into Newton’s second law, , gives
4.34
We substitute known values to obtain
4.35
which yields
4.36
which is the acceleration parallel to the incline when there is 45.0 N of opposing friction.
Discussion
Since friction always opposes motion between surfaces, the acceleration is smaller when there is friction than when
there is none. In fact, it is a general result that if friction on an incline is negligible, then the acceleration down the
incline is ,regardless of mass. This is related to the previously discussed fact that all objects fall with the
same acceleration in the absence of air resistance. Similarly, all objects, regardless of mass, slide down a frictionless
incline with the same acceleration (if the angle is the same).
Resolving Weight into Components
FIGURE4.13An object rests on an incline that makes an angle θ with the horizontal.
When an object rests on an incline that makes an angle with the horizontal, the force of gravity acting on the
object is divided into two components: a force acting perpendicular to the plane, ,and a force acting parallel
to the plane, . The perpendicular force of weight, ,is typically equal in magnitude and opposite in
direction to the normal force, . The force acting parallel to the plane, , causes the object to accelerate down
the incline. The force of friction, , opposes the motion of the object, so it acts upward along the plane.
It is important to be careful when resolving the weight of the object into components. If the angle of the incline
is at an angle to the horizontal, then the magnitudes of the weight components are
4.37
and
4.38
Instead of memorizing these equations, it is helpful to be able to determine them from reason. To do this, draw
the right triangle formed by the three weight vectors. Notice that the angle of the incline is the same as the
angle formed between and . Knowing this property, you can use trigonometry to determine the magnitude
of the weight components:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 183
4.5 • Normal, Tension, and Other Examples of Forces 165
4.39
4.40
Take-Home Experiment: Force Parallel
To investigate how a force parallel to an inclined plane changes, find a rubber band, some objects to hang from
the end of the rubber band, and a board you can position at different angles. How much does the rubber band
stretch when you hang the object from the end of the board? Now place the board at an angle so that the object
slides off when placed on the board. How much does the rubber band extend if it is lined up parallel to the board
and used to hold the object stationary on the board? Try two more angles. What does this show?
Tension
Atensionis a force along the length of a medium, especially a force carried by a flexible medium, such as a rope or
cable. The word “tension”comes from a Latin word meaning “to stretch.” Not coincidentally, the flexible cords that
carry muscle forces to other parts of the body are calledtendons. Any flexible connector, such as a string, rope,
chain, wire, or cable, can exert pulls only parallel to its length; thus, a force carried by a flexible connector is a
tension with direction parallel to the connector. It is important to understand that tension is a pull in a connector. In
contrast, consider the phrase: “You can’t push a rope.” The tension force pulls outward along the two ends of a rope.
Consider a person holding a mass on a rope as shown inFigure 4.14.
FIGURE4.14When a perfectly flexible connector (one requiring no force to bend it) such as this rope transmits a force , that force must
be parallel to the length of the rope, as shown. The pull such a flexible connector exerts is a tension. Note that the rope pulls with equal
force but in opposite directions on the hand and the supported mass (neglecting the weight of the rope). This is an example of Newton’s
third law. The rope is the medium that carries the equal and opposite forces between the two objects. The tension anywhere in the rope
between the hand and the mass is equal. Once you have determined the tension in one location, you have determined the tension at all
locations along the rope.
Tension in the rope must equal the weight of the supported mass, as we can prove using Newton’s second law. If the
5.00-kg mass in the figure is stationary, then its acceleration is zero, and thus . The only external forces
acting on the mass are its weight and the tension supplied by the rope. Thus,
4.41
where and are the magnitudes of the tension and weight and their signs indicate direction, with up being
PAGE: 184
166 4 • Dynamics: Force and Newton's Laws of Motion
positive here. Thus, just as you would expect, the tension equals the weight of the supported mass:
4.42
For a 5.00-kg mass, then (neglecting the mass of the rope) we see that
4.43
If we cut the rope and insert a spring, the spring would extend a length corresponding to a force of 49.0 N, providing
a direct observation and measure of the tension force in the rope.
Flexible connectors are often used to transmit forces around corners, such as in a hospital traction system, a finger
joint, or a bicycle brake cable. If there is no friction, the tension is transmitted undiminished. Only its direction
changes, and it is always parallel to the flexible connector. This is illustrated inFigure 4.15(a) and (b).
FIGURE4.15(a) Tendons in the finger carry force from the muscles to other parts of the finger, usually changing the force’s direction, but
not its magnitude (the tendons are relatively friction free). (b) The brake cable on a bicycle carries the tension from the handlebars to the
brake mechanism. Again, the direction but not the magnitude of is changed.
EXAMPLE 4.6
What Is the Tension in a Tightrope?
Calculate the tension in the wire supporting the 70.0-kg tightrope walker shown inFigure 4.16.
FIGURE4.16The weight of a tightrope walker causes a wire to sag by 5.0 degrees. The system of interest here is the point in the wire at
which the tightrope walker is standing.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 185
4.5 • Normal, Tension, and Other Examples of Forces 167
Strategy
As you can see in the figure, the wire is not perfectly horizontal (it cannot be!), but is bent under the person’s weight.
Thus, the tension on either side of the person has an upward component that can support his weight. As usual,
forces are vectors represented pictorially by arrows having the same directions as the forces and lengths
proportional to their magnitudes. The system is the tightrope walker, and the only external forces acting on him are
his weight and the two tensions (lefttension) and (right tension), as illustrated. It is reasonable to neglect
the weight of the wire itself. The net external force is zero since the system is stationary. A little trigonometry can
now be used to find the tensions. One conclusion is possible at the outset—we can see from part (b) of the figure
that the magnitudes of the tensions and must be equal. This is because there is no horizontal acceleration in
the rope, and the only forces acting to the left and right are and . Thus, the magnitude of those forces must be
equal so that they cancel each other out.
Whenever we have two-dimensional vector problems in which no two vectors are parallel, the easiest method of
solution is to pick a convenient coordinate system and project the vectors onto its axes. In this case the best
coordinate system has one axis horizontal and the other vertical. We call the horizontal the -axis and the vertical
the -axis.
Solution
First, we need to resolve the tension vectors into their horizontal and vertical components. It helps to draw a new
free-body diagram showing all of the horizontal and vertical components of each force acting on the system.
FIGURE4.17When the vectors are projected onto vertical and horizontal axes, their components along those axes must add to zero, since
the tightrope walker is stationary. The small angle results in being much greater than .
Consider the horizontal components of the forces (denoted with a subscript ):
4.44
The net external horizontal force , since the person is stationary. Thus,
4.45
Now, observeFigure 4.17. You can use trigonometry to determine the magnitude of and . Notice that:
4.46
Equating and :
4.47
Thus,
4.48
PAGE: 186
168 4 • Dynamics: Force and Newton's Laws of Motion
as predicted. Now, considering the vertical components (denoted by a subscript ), we can solve for . Again, since
the person is stationary, Newton’s second law implies that net . Thus, as illustrated in the free-body diagram
inFigure 4.17,
4.49
ObservingFigure 4.17, we can use trigonometry to determine the relationship between , , and . As we
determined from the analysis in the horizontal direction, :
4.50
Now, we can substitute the values for and , into the net force equation in the vertical direction:
4.51
and
4.52
so that
4.53
and the tension is
4.54
Discussion
Note that the vertical tension in the wire acts as a normal force that supports the weight of the tightrope walker.The
tension is almost six times the 686-N weight of the tightrope walker. Since the wire is nearly horizontal, the vertical
component of its tension is only a small fraction of the tension in the wire. The large horizontal components are in
opposite directions and cancel, and so most of the tension in the wire is not used to support the weight of the
tightrope walker.
If we wish tocreatea very large tension, all we have to do is exert a force perpendicular to a flexible connector, as
illustrated inFigure 4.18. As we saw in the last example, the weight of the tightrope walker acted as a force
perpendicular to the rope. We saw that the tension in the roped related to the weight of the tightrope walker in the
following way:
4.55
We can extend this expression to describe the tension created when a perpendicular force ( ) is exerted at the
middle of a flexible connector:
4.56
Note that is the angle between the horizontal and the bent connector. In this case, becomes very large as
approaches zero. Even the relatively small weight of any flexible connector will cause it to sag, since an infinite
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 187
4.5 • Normal, Tension, and Other Examples of Forces 169
tension would result if it were horizontal (i.e., and ). (SeeFigure 4.18.)
FIGURE4.18We can create a very large tension in the chain by pushing on it perpendicular to its length, as shown. Suppose we wish to pull
a car out of the mud when no tow truck is available. Each time the car moves forward, the chain is tightened to keep it as nearly straight as
possible. The tension in the chain is given by ; since is small, is very large. This situation is analogous to the tightrope
walker shown inFigure 4.16, except that the tensions shown here are those transmitted to the car and the tree rather than those acting at
the point where is applied.
FIGURE4.19Unless an infinite tension is exerted, any flexible connector—such as the chain at the bottom of the picture—will sag under its
own weight, giving a characteristic curve when the weight is evenly distributed along the length. Suspension bridges—such as the Golden
Gate Bridge shown in this image—are essentially very heavy flexible connectors. The weight of the bridge is evenly distributed along the
length of flexible connectors, usually cables, which take on the characteristic shape. (credit: Leaflet, Wikimedia Commons)
Extended Topic: Real Forces and Inertial Frames
There is another distinction among forces in addition to the types already mentioned. Some forces are real, whereas
others are not.Real forcesare those that have some physical origin, such as the gravitational pull. Contrastingly,
fictitious forcesare those that arise simply because an observer is in an accelerating frame of reference, such as one
that rotates (like a merry-go-round) or undergoes linear acceleration (like a car slowing down). For example, if a
satellite is heading due north above Earth’s northern hemisphere, then to an observer on Earth it will appear to
experience a force to the west that has no physical origin. Of course, what is happening here is that Earth is rotating
toward the east and moves east under the satellite. In Earth’s frame this looks like a westward force on the satellite,
or it can be interpreted as a violation of Newton’s first law (the law of inertia). Aninertial frame of referenceis one
in which all forces are real and, equivalently, one in which Newton’s laws have the simple forms given in this chapter.
Earth’s rotation is slow enough that Earth is nearly an inertial frame. You ordinarily must perform precise
experiments to observe fictitious forces and the slight departures from Newton’s laws, such as the effect just
described. On the large scale, such as for the rotation of weather systems and ocean currents, the effects can be
easily observed.
The crucial factor in determining whether a frame of reference is inertial is whether it accelerates or rotates relative
to a known inertial frame. Unless stated otherwise, all phenomena discussed in this text are considered in inertial
frames.
All the forces discussed in this section are real forces, but there are a number of other real forces, such as lift and
thrust, that are not discussed in this section. They are more specialized, and it is not necessary to discuss every type
of force. It is natural, however, to ask where the basic simplicity we seek to find in physics is in the long list of forces.
Are some more basic than others? Are some different manifestations of the same underlying force? The answer to
PAGE: 188
170 4 • Dynamics: Force and Newton's Laws of Motion
both questions is yes, as will be seen in the next (extended) section and in the treatment of modern physics later in
the text.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Forces in 1 Dimension
Explore the forces at work when you try to push a filing cabinet. Create an applied force and see the resulting friction
force and total force acting on the cabinet. Charts show the forces, position, velocity, and acceleration vs. time. View
a free-body diagram of all the forces (including gravitational and normal forces).
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/l/21forcesatwork).
4.6 Problem-Solving Strategies
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Understand and apply a problem-solving procedure to solve problems using Newton's laws of motion.
Success in problem solving is obviously necessary to understand and apply physical principles, not to mention the
more immediate need of passing exams. The basics of problem solving, presented earlier in this text, are followed
here, but specific strategies useful in applying Newton’s laws of motion are emphasized. These techniques also
reinforce concepts that are useful in many other areas of physics. Many problem-solving strategies are stated
outright in the worked examples, and so the following techniques should reinforce skills you have already begun to
develop.
Problem-Solving Strategy for Newton’s Laws of Motion
Step 1. As usual, it is first necessary to identify the physical principles involved.Once it is determined that Newton’s
laws of motion are involved (if the problem involves forces), it is particularly important to draw a careful sketch of
the situation. Such a sketch is shown inFigure 4.20(a). Then, as inFigure 4.20(b), use arrows to represent all forces,
label them carefully, and make their lengths and directions correspond to the forces they represent (whenever
sufficient information exists).
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 189
4.6 • Problem-Solving Strategies 171
FIGURE4.20(a) A sketch of Tarzan hanging from a vine. (b) Arrows are used to represent all forces. is the tension in the vine above
Tarzan, is the force he exerts on the vine, and is his weight. All other forces, such as the nudge of a breeze, are assumed negligible. (c)
Suppose we are given the ape man’s mass and asked to find the tension in the vine. We then define the system of interest as shown and
draw a free-body diagram. is no longer shown, because it is not a force acting on the system of interest; rather, acts on the outside
world. (d) Showing only the arrows, the head-to-tail method of addition is used. It is apparent that , if Tarzan is stationary.
Step 2. Identify what needs to be determined and what is known or can be inferred from the problem as stated. That
is, make a list of knowns and unknowns.Then carefully determine the system of interest. This decision is a crucial
step, since Newton’s second law involves only external forces. Once the system of interest has been identified, it
becomes possible to determine which forces are external and which are internal, a necessary step to employ
Newton’s second law. (SeeFigure 4.20(c).) Newton’s third law may be used to identify whether forces are exerted
between components of a system (internal) or between the system and something outside (external). As illustrated
earlier in this chapter, the system of interest depends on what question we need to answer. This choice becomes
easier with practice, eventually developing into an almost unconscious process. Skill in clearly defining systems will
be beneficial in later chapters as well.
A diagram showing the system of interest and all of the external forces is called afree-body diagram. Only forces
are shown on free-body diagrams, not acceleration or velocity. We have drawn several of these in worked examples.
Figure 4.20(c) shows a free-body diagram for the system of interest. Note that no internal forces are shown in a
free-body diagram.
Step 3. Once a free-body diagram is drawn,Newton’s second law can be applied to solve the problem. This is done
inFigure 4.20(d) for a particular situation. In general, once external forces are clearly identified in free-body
diagrams, it should be a straightforward task to put them into equation form and solve for the unknown, as done in
all previous examples. If the problem is one-dimensional—that is, if all forces are parallel—then they add like
scalars. If the problem is two-dimensional, then it must be broken down into a pair of one-dimensional problems.
This is done by projecting the force vectors onto a set of axes chosen for convenience. As seen in previous
examples, the choice of axes can simplify the problem. For example, when an incline is involved, a set of axes with
one axis parallel to the incline and one perpendicular to it is most convenient. It is almost always convenient to
make one axis parallel to the direction of motion, if this is known.
PAGE: 190
172 4 • Dynamics: Force and Newton's Laws of Motion
Applying Newton’s Second Law
Before you write net force equations, it is critical to determine whether the system is accelerating in a particular
direction. If the acceleration is zero in a particular direction, then the net force is zero in that direction. Similarly,
if the acceleration is nonzero in a particular direction, then the net force is described by the equation:
.
For example, if the system is accelerating in the horizontal direction, but it is not accelerating in the vertical
direction, then you will have the following conclusions:
4.57
4.58
You will need this information in order to determine unknown forces acting in a system.
Step 4. As always,check the solution to see whether it is reasonable. In some cases, this is obvious. For example, it
is reasonable to find that friction causes an object to slide down an incline more slowly than when no friction exists.
In practice, intuition develops gradually through problem solving, and with experience it becomes progressively
easier to judge whether an answer is reasonable. Another way to check your solution is to check the units. If you are
solving for force and end up with units of m/s, then you have made a mistake.
4.7 Further Applications of Newton’s Laws of Motion
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Apply problem-solving techniques to solve for quantities in more complex systems of forces.
• Integrate concepts from kinematics to solve problems using Newton's laws of motion.
There are many interesting applications of Newton’s laws of motion, a few more of which are presented in this
section. These serve also to illustrate some further subtleties of physics and to help build problem-solving skills.
EXAMPLE 4.7
Drag Force on a Barge
Suppose two tugboats push on a barge at different angles, as shown inFigure 4.21. The first tugboat exerts a force
of in thex-direction, and the second tugboat exerts a force of in they-direction.
FIGURE4.21(a) A view from above of two tugboats pushing on a barge. (b) The free-body diagram for the ship contains only forces acting
in the plane of the water. It omits the two vertical forces—the weight of the barge and the buoyant force of the water supporting it cancel
and are not shown. Since the applied forces are perpendicular, thex- andy-axes are in the same direction as and . The problem
quickly becomes a one-dimensional problem along the direction of , since friction is in the direction opposite to .
If the mass of the barge is and its acceleration is observed to be in the direction
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 191
4.7 • Further Applications of Newton’s Laws of Motion 173
shown, what is the drag force of the water on the barge resisting the motion? (Note: drag force is a frictional force
exerted by fluids, such as air or water. The drag force opposes the motion of the object.)
Strategy
The directions and magnitudes of acceleration and the applied forces are given inFigure 4.21(a). We will define the
total force of the tugboats on the barge as so that:
4.59
Since the barge is flat bottomed, the drag of the water will be in the direction opposite to , as shown in the
free-body diagram inFigure 4.21(b). The system of interest here is the barge, since the forces onitare given as well
as its acceleration. Our strategy is to find the magnitude and direction of the net applied force , and then apply
Newton’s second law to solve for the drag force .
Solution
Since and are perpendicular, the magnitude and direction of are easily found. First, the resultant
magnitude is given by the Pythagorean theorem:
4.60
The angle is given by
4.61
which we know, because of Newton’s first law, is the same direction as the acceleration. is in the opposite
direction of , since it acts to slow down the acceleration. Therefore, the net external force is in the same
direction as , but its magnitude is slightly less than . The problem is now one-dimensional. FromFigure
4.21(b), we can see that
4.62
But Newton’s second law states that
4.63
Thus,
4.64
This can be solved for the magnitude of the drag force of the water in terms of known quantities:
4.65
Substituting known values gives
4.66
The direction of has already been determined to be in the direction opposite to , or at an angle of south
of west.
Discussion
The numbers used in this example are reasonable for a moderately large barge. It is certainly difficult to obtain
larger accelerations with tugboats, and small speeds are desirable to avoid running the barge into the docks. Drag is
relatively small for a well-designed hull at low speeds, consistent with the answer to this example, where is less
than 1/600th of the weight of the ship.
PAGE: 192
174 4 • Dynamics: Force and Newton's Laws of Motion
In the earlier example of a tightrope walker we noted that the tensions in wires supporting a mass were equal only
because the angles on either side were equal. Consider the following example, where the angles are not equal;
slightly more trigonometry is involved.
EXAMPLE 4.8
Different Tensions at Different Angles
Consider the traffic light (mass 15.0 kg) suspended from two wires as shown inFigure 4.22. Find the tension in each
wire, neglecting the masses of the wires.
FIGURE4.22A traffic light is suspended from two wires. (b) Some of the forces involved. (c) Only forces acting on the system are shown
here. The free-body diagram for the traffic light is also shown. (d) The forces projected onto vertical (y) and horizontal (x) axes. The
horizontal components of the tensions must cancel, and the sum of the vertical components of the tensions must equal the weight of the
traffic light. (e) The free-body diagram shows the vertical and horizontal forces acting on the traffic light.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 193
4.7 • Further Applications of Newton’s Laws of Motion 175
Strategy
The system of interest is the traffic light, and its free-body diagram is shown inFigure 4.22(c). The three forces
involved are not parallel, and so they must be projected onto a coordinate system. The most convenient coordinate
system has one axis vertical and one horizontal, and the vector projections on it are shown in part (d) of the figure.
There are two unknowns in this problem ( and ), so two equations are needed to find them. These two
equations come from applying Newton’s second law along the vertical and horizontal axes, noting that the net
external force is zero along each axis because acceleration is zero.
Solution
First consider the horizontal orx-axis:
4.67
Thus, as you might expect,
4.68
This gives us the following relationship between and :
4.69
Thus,
4.70
Note that and are not equal in this case, because the angles on either side are not equal. It is reasonable that
ends up being greater than , because it is exerted more vertically than .
Now consider the force components along the vertical ory-axis:
4.71
This implies
4.72
Substituting the expressions for the vertical components gives
4.73
There are two unknowns in this equation, but substituting the expression for in terms of reduces this to one
equation with one unknown:
4.74
which yields
4.75
Solving this last equation gives the magnitude of to be
4.76
Finally, the magnitude of is determined using the relationship between them, = 1.225 , found above. Thus
we obtain
4.77
Discussion
Both tensions would be larger if both wires were more horizontal, and they will be equal if and only if the angles on
either side are the same (as they were in the earlier example of a tightrope walker).
The bathroom scale is an excellent example of a normal force acting on a body. It provides a quantitative reading of
how much it must push upward to support the weight of an object. But can you predict what you would see on the
PAGE: 194
176 4 • Dynamics: Force and Newton's Laws of Motion
dial of a bathroom scale if you stood on it during an elevator ride? Will you see a value greater than your weight
when the elevator starts up? What about when the elevator moves upward at a constant speed: will the scale still
read more than your weight at rest? Consider the following example.
EXAMPLE 4.9
What Does the Bathroom Scale Read in an Elevator?
Figure 4.23shows a 75.0-kg man (weight of about 165 lb) standing on a bathroom scale in an elevator. Calculate the
scale reading: (a) if the elevator accelerates upward at a rate of , and (b) if the elevator moves upward at a
constant speed of 1 m/s.
FIGURE4.23(a) The various forces acting when a person stands on a bathroom scale in an elevator. The arrows are approximately correct
for when the elevator is accelerating upward—broken arrows represent forces too large to be drawn to scale. is the weight of the scale,
is the weight of the elevator, is the force of the scale on the person, is the force of the person on the scale, is the force of the
scale on the floor of the elevator, and is the force of the floor upward on the scale. (b) The free-body diagram shows only the external
forces acting on the designated system of interest—the person.
Strategy
If the scale is accurate, its reading will equal , the magnitude of the force the person exerts downward on it.
Figure 4.23(a) shows the numerous forces acting on the elevator, scale, and person. It makes this one-dimensional
problem look much more formidable than if the person is chosen to be the system of interest and a free-body
diagram is drawn as inFigure 4.23(b). Analysis of the free-body diagram using Newton’s laws can produce answers
to both parts (a) and (b) of this example, as well as some other questions that might arise. The only forces acting on
the person are his weight and the upward force of the scale . According to Newton’s third law and are
equal in magnitude and opposite in direction, so that we need to find in order to find what the scale reads. We
can do this, as usual, by applying Newton’s second law,
4.78
From the free-body diagram we see that , so that
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 195
4.7 • Further Applications of Newton’s Laws of Motion 177
4.79
Solving for gives an equation with only one unknown:
4.80
or, because , simply
4.81
No assumptions were made about the acceleration, and so this solution should be valid for a variety of accelerations
in addition to the ones in this exercise.
Solution for (a)
In this part of the problem, , so that
4.82
yielding
4.83
Discussion for (a)
This is about 185 lb. What would the scale have read if he were stationary? Since his acceleration would be zero, the
force of the scale would be equal to his weight:
4.84
So, the scale reading in the elevator is greater than his 735-N (165 lb) weight. This means that the scale is pushing
up on the person with a force greater than his weight, as it must in order to accelerate him upward. Clearly, the
greater the acceleration of the elevator, the greater the scale reading, consistent with what you feel in rapidly
accelerating versus slowly accelerating elevators.
Solution for (b)
Now, what happens when the elevator reaches a constant upward velocity? Will the scale still read more than his
weight? For any constant velocity—up, down, or stationary—acceleration is zero because , and .
Thus,
4.85
Now
4.86
which gives
4.87
Discussion for (b)
The scale reading is 735 N, which equals the person’s weight. This will be the case whenever the elevator has a
constant velocity—moving up, moving down, or stationary.
The solution to the previous example also applies to an elevator accelerating downward, as mentioned. When an
elevator accelerates downward, is negative, and the scale reading islessthan the weight of the person, until a
constant downward velocity is reached, at which time the scale reading again becomes equal to the person’s weight.
If the elevator is in free-fall and accelerating downward at , then the scale reading will be zero and the person will
appearto be weightless.
PAGE: 196
178 4 • Dynamics: Force and Newton's Laws of Motion
Integrating Concepts: Newton’s Laws of Motion and Kinematics
Physics is most interesting and most powerful when applied to general situations that involve more than a narrow
set of physical principles. Newton’s laws of motion can also be integrated with other concepts that have been
discussed previously in this text to solve problems of motion. For example, forces produce accelerations, a topic of
kinematics, and hence the relevance of earlier chapters. When approaching problems that involve various types of
forces, acceleration, velocity, and/or position, use the following steps to approach the problem:
Problem-Solving Strategy
Step 1.Identify which physical principles are involved. Listing the givens and the quantities to be calculated will
allow you to identify the principles involved.
Step 2.Solve the problem using strategies outlined in the text. If these are available for the specific topic, you
should refer to them. You should also refer to the sections of the text that deal with a particular topic. The following
worked example illustrates how these strategies are applied to an integrated concept problem.
EXAMPLE 4.10
What Force Must a Soccer Player Exert to Reach Top Speed?
A soccer player starts from rest and accelerates forward, reaching a velocity of 8.00 m/s in 2.50 s. (a) What was his
average acceleration? (b) What average force did he exert backward on the ground to achieve this acceleration? The
player’s mass is 70.0 kg, and air resistance is negligible.
Strategy
1. To solve anintegrated concept problem, we must first identify the physical principles involved and identify the
chapters in which they are found. Part (a) of this example considersaccelerationalong a straight line. This is a
topic ofkinematics. Part (b) deals withforce, a topic ofdynamicsfound in this chapter.
2. The following solutions to each part of the example illustrate how the specific problem-solving strategies are
applied. These involve identifying knowns and unknowns, checking to see if the answer is reasonable, and so
forth.
Solution for (a)
We are given the initial and final velocities (zero and 8.00 m/s forward); thus, the change in velocity is
. We are given the elapsed time, and so . The unknown is acceleration, which can be
found from its definition:
4.88
Substituting the known values yields
4.89
Discussion for (a)
This is an attainable acceleration for an athlete in good condition.
Solution for (b)
Here we are asked to find the average force the player exerts backward to achieve this forward acceleration.
Neglecting air resistance, this would be equal in magnitude to the net external force on the player, since this force
causes his acceleration. Since we now know the player’s acceleration and are given his mass, we can use Newton’s
second law to find the force exerted. That is,
4.90
Substituting the known values of and gives
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 197
4.8 • Extended Topic: The Four Basic Forces—An Introduction 179
4.91
Discussion for (b)
This is about 50 pounds, a reasonable average force.
This worked example illustrates how to apply problem-solving strategies to situations that include topics from
different chapters. The first step is to identify the physical principles involved in the problem. The second step is to
solve for the unknown using familiar problem-solving strategies. These strategies are found throughout the text, and
many worked examples show how to use them for single topics. You will find these techniques for integrated
concept problems useful in applications of physics outside of a physics course, such as in your profession, in other
science disciplines, and in everyday life. The following problems will build your skills in the broad application of
physical principles.
4.8 Extended Topic: The Four Basic Forces—An Introduction
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Understand the four basic forces that underlie the processes in nature.
One of the most remarkable simplifications in physics is that only four distinct forces account for all known
phenomena. In fact, nearly all of the forces we experience directly are due to only one basic force, called the
electromagnetic force. (The gravitational force is the only force we experience directly that is not electromagnetic.)
This is a tremendous simplification of the myriad ofapparentlydifferent forces we can list, only a few of which were
discussed in the previous section. As we will see, the basic forces are all thought to act through the exchange of
microscopic carrier particles, and the characteristics of the basic forces are determined by the types of particles
exchanged. Action at a distance, such as the gravitational force of Earth on the Moon, is explained by the existence
of aforce fieldrather than by “physical contact.”
Thefour basic forcesare the gravitational force, the electromagnetic force, the weak nuclear force, and the strong
nuclear force. Their properties are summarized inTable 4.1. Since the weak and strong nuclear forces act over an
extremely short range, the size of a nucleus or less, we do not experience them directly, although they are crucial to
the very structure of matter. These forces determine which nuclei are stable and which decay, and they are the basis
of the release of energy in certain nuclear reactions. Nuclear forces determine not only the stability of nuclei, but
also the relative abundance of elements in nature. The properties of the nucleus of an atom determine the number
of electrons it has and, thus, indirectly determine the chemistry of the atom. More will be said of all of these topics
in later chapters.
Concept Connections: The Four Basic Forces
The four basic forces will be encountered in more detail as you progress through the text. The gravitational force
is defined inUniform Circular Motion and Gravitation, electric force inElectric Charge and Electric Field,
magnetic force inMagnetism, and nuclear forces inRadioactivity and Nuclear Physics. On a macroscopic scale,
electromagnetism and gravity are the basis for all forces. The nuclear forces are vital to the substructure of
matter, but they are not directly experienced on the macroscopic scale.
PAGE: 198
180 4 • Dynamics: Force and Newton's Laws of Motion
Force Approximate Relative Strengths Range Attraction/Repulsion Carrier Particle
Gravitational attractive only Graviton
Electromagnetic attractive and repulsive Photon
Weak nuclear < attractive and repulsive , ,
Strong nuclear ∞ attractive and repulsive gluons
TABLE4.1Properties of the Four Basic Forces 1
The gravitational force is surprisingly weak—it is only because gravity is always attractive that we notice it at all. Our
weight is the gravitational force due to theentireEarth acting on us. On the very large scale, as in astronomical
systems, the gravitational force is the dominant force determining the motions of moons, planets, stars, and
galaxies. The gravitational force also affects the nature of space and time. As we shall see later in the study of
general relativity, space is curved in the vicinity of very massive bodies, such as the Sun, and time actually slows
down near massive bodies.
Electromagnetic forces can be either attractive or repulsive. They are long-range forces, which act over extremely
large distances, and they nearly cancel for macroscopic objects. (Remember that it is thenetexternal force that is
important.) If they did not cancel, electromagnetic forces would completely overwhelm the gravitational force. The
electromagnetic force is a combination of electrical forces (such as those that cause static electricity) and magnetic
forces (such as those that affect a compass needle). These two forces were thought to be quite distinct until early in
the 19th century, when scientists began to discover that they are different manifestations of the same force. This
discovery is a classical case of theunification of forces. Similarly, friction, tension, and all of the other classes of
forces we experience directly (except gravity, of course) are due to electromagnetic interactions of atoms and
molecules. It is still convenient to consider these forces separately in specific applications, however, because of the
ways they manifest themselves.
Concept Connections: Unifying Forces
Attempts to unify the four basic forces are discussed in relation to elementary particles later in this text. By
“unify” we mean finding connections between the forces that show that they are different manifestations of a
single force. Even if such unification is achieved, the forces will retain their separate characteristics on the
macroscopic scale and may be identical only under extreme conditions such as those existing in the early
universe.
Physicists are now exploring whether the four basic forces are in some way related. Attempts to unify all forces into
one come under the rubric of Grand Unified Theories (GUTs), with which there has been some success in recent
years. It is now known that under conditions of extremely high density and temperature, such as existed in the early
universe, the electromagnetic and weak nuclear forces are indistinguishable. They can now be considered to be
different manifestations of one force, called theelectroweakforce. So the list of four has been reduced in a sense to
only three. Further progress in unifying all forces is proving difficult—especially the inclusion of the gravitational
force, which has the special characteristics of affecting the space and time in which the other forces exist.
While the unification of forces will not affect how we discuss forces in this text, it is fascinating that such underlying
simplicity exists in the face of the overt complexity of the universe. There is no reason that nature must be simple—it
simply is.
1 The graviton is a proposed particle, though it has not yet been observed by scientists. See the discussion of gravitational waves later in
this section. The particles , , and are called vector bosons; these were predicted by theory and first observed in 1983. There are
eight types of gluons proposed by scientists, and their existence is indicated by meson exchange in the nuclei of atoms.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 199
4.8 • Extended Topic: The Four Basic Forces—An Introduction 181
Action at a Distance: Concept of a Field
All forces act at a distance. This is obvious for the gravitational force. Earth and the Moon, for example, interact
without coming into contact. It is also true for all other forces. Friction, for example, is an electromagnetic force
between atoms that may not actually touch. What is it that carries forces between objects? One way to answer this
question is to imagine that aforce fieldsurrounds whatever object creates the force. A second object (often called a
test object) placed in this field will experience a force that is a function of location and other variables. The field
itself is the “thing” that carries the force from one object to another. The field is defined so as to be a characteristic
of the object creating it; the field does not depend on the test object placed in it. Earth’s gravitational field, for
example, is a function of the mass of Earth and the distance from its center, independent of the presence of other
masses. The concept of a field is useful because equations can be written for force fields surrounding objects (for
gravity, this yields at Earth’s surface), and motions can be calculated from these equations. (SeeFigure
4.24.)
FIGURE4.24The electric force field between a positively charged particle and a negatively charged particle. When a positive test charge is
placed in the field, the charge will experience a force in the direction of the force field lines.
Concept Connections: Force Fields
The concept of aforce fieldis also used in connection with electric charge and is presented inElectric Charge
and Electric Field. It is also a useful idea for all the basic forces, as will be seen inParticle Physics. Fields help us
to visualize forces and how they are transmitted, as well as to describe them with precision and to link forces
with subatomic carrier particles.
The field concept has been applied very successfully; we can calculate motions and describe nature to high
precision using field equations. As useful as the field concept is, however, it leaves unanswered the question of what
carries the force. It has been proposed in recent decades, starting in 1935 with Hideki Yukawa’s (1907–1981) work
on the strong nuclear force, that all forces are transmitted by the exchange of elementary particles. We can visualize
particle exchange as analogous to macroscopic phenomena such as two people passing a basketball back and forth,
thereby exerting a repulsive force without touching one another. (SeeFigure 4.25.)
PAGE: 200
182 4 • Dynamics: Force and Newton's Laws of Motion
FIGURE4.25The exchange of masses resulting in repulsive forces. (a) The person throwing the basketball exerts a force on it toward
the other person and feels a reaction force away from the second person. (b) The person catching the basketball exerts a force on it
to stop the ball and feels a reaction force away from the first person. (c) The analogous exchange of a meson between a proton and a
neutron carries the strong nuclear forces and between them. An attractive force can also be exerted by the exchange of a
mass—if person 2 pulled the basketball away from the first person as he tried to retain it, then the force between them would be attractive.
This idea of particle exchange deepens rather than contradicts field concepts. It is more satisfying philosophically to
think of something physical actually moving between objects acting at a distance.Table 4.1lists the exchange or
carrier particles, both observed and proposed, that carry the four forces. But the real fruit of the particle-exchange
proposal is that searches for Yukawa’s proposed particle found itanda number of others that were completely
unexpected, stimulating yet more research. All of this research eventually led to the proposal of quarks as the
underlying substructure of matter, which is a basic tenet of GUTs. If successful, these theories will explain not only
forces, but also the structure of matter itself. Yet physics is an experimental science, so the test of these theories
must lie in the domain of the real world. As of this writing, scientists at the CERN laboratory in Switzerland are
starting to test these theories using the world’s largest particle accelerator: the Large Hadron Collider. This
accelerator (27 km in circumference) allows two high-energy proton beams, traveling in opposite directions, to
collide. An energy of 14 trillion electron volts will be available. It is anticipated that some new particles, possibly
force carrier particles, will be found. (SeeFigure 4.26.) One of the force carriers of high interest that researchers
hope to detect is the Higgs boson. The observation of its properties might tell us why different particles have
different masses.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 201
4.8 • Extended Topic: The Four Basic Forces—An Introduction 183
FIGURE4.26The world’s largest particle accelerator spans the border between Switzerland and France. Two beams, traveling in opposite
directions close to the speed of light, collide in a tube similar to the central tube shown here. External magnets determine the beam’s path.
Special detectors will analyze particles created in these collisions. Questions as broad as what is the origin of mass and what was matter
like the first few seconds of our universe will be explored. This accelerator began preliminary operation in 2008. (credit: Frank Hommes)
Tiny particles also have wave-like behavior, something we will explore more in a later chapter. To better understand
force-carrier particles from another perspective, let us consider gravity. The search for gravitational waves has been
going on for a number of years. Over 100 years ago, Einstein predicted the existence of these waves as part of his
general theory of relativity. Gravitational waves are created during the collision of massive stars, in black holes, or in
supernova explosions—like shock waves. These gravitational waves will travel through space from such sites much
like a pebble dropped into a pond sends out ripples—except these waves move at the speed of light. A detector
apparatus has been built in the U.S., consisting of two large installations nearly 3000 km apart—one in Washington
state and one in Louisiana! The facility is called the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO).
Each installation is designed to use optical lasers to examine any slight shift in the relative positions of two masses
due to the effect of gravity waves. The two sites allow simultaneous measurements of these small effects to be
separated from other natural phenomena, such as earthquakes. Initial operation of the detectors began in 2002,
and work is proceeding on increasing their sensitivity. Similar installations have been built in Italy (VIRGO), Germany
(GEO600), and Japan (TAMA300) to provide a worldwide network of gravitational wave detectors.
In September, 2015, LIGO fulfilled its promise and helped prove Einstein's predictions. The system detected the
first gravitational waves arising from the merger of two black holes—one 29 times the mass of our Sun and the other
36 times the mass of our Sun—that occurred 1.3 billion years ago. About 3 times the mass of the Sun was converted
into gravitational waves in a fraction of a second—with a peak power output about 50 times that of the whole visible
universe. Due to the 7 millisecond delay in detection, researchers established that the merger occurred on the
southern hemisphere side of Earth. Since then, LIGO and VIRGO have combined to detect about a dozen similar
events, with better and more precise measurements. Waves from neutron star mergers and different-sized black
holes have deepened our understanding of these objects and their impact on the universe.
International collaboration in this area is moving into space with the joint EU/US project LISA (Laser Interferometer
Space Antenna). Earthquakes and other Earthly noises will be no problem for these monitoring spacecraft. LISA will
complement LIGO by looking at much more massive black holes through the observation of gravitational-wave
sources emitting much larger wavelengths. Three satellites will be placed in space above Earth in an equilateral
triangle (with 5,000,000-km sides) (Figure 4.27). The system will measure the relative positions of each satellite to
detect passing gravitational waves. Accuracy to within 10% of the size of an atom will be needed to detect any
waves. The launch of this project will likely be in the 2030s.
PAGE: 202
184 4 • Dynamics: Force and Newton's Laws of Motion
FIGURE4.27Space-based future experiments for the measurement of gravitational waves. Shown here is a drawing of LISA’s orbit. Each
satellite of LISA will consist of a laser source and a mass. The lasers will transmit a signal to measure the distance between each satellite’s
test mass. The relative motion of these masses will provide information about passing gravitational waves. (credit: NASA)
As you can see above, some of the most groundbreaking developments in physics are made with a relatively long
gap from theoretical prediction to experimental detection. This pattern continues the process of science from its
earliest days, where early thinkers and researchers made discoveries that only led to more questions. Einstein was
unique in many ways, but he was not unique in that later scientists, building on his and each other's work, would
prove his theories. Evidence for black holes became more and more concrete as scientists developed new and
better ways to look for them. Some of the most prominent have been Roger Penrose, who developed new
mathematical models related to black holes, as well as Reinhard Genzel and Andrea Ghez, who independently used
telescope observations to identify a region of our galaxy where a massive unseen gravity source (4 million times the
size of our Sun) was pulling on stars. And soon after, collaborators on the Event Horizon Telescope project produced
the first actual image of a black hole.
FIGURE4.28This updated image of the supermassive black hole at the center of the M87 galaxy shows the polarization created by the
powerful magnetic field that surrounds the object. The image was created by the Event Horizon Telescope, which combines data from
telescopes around the world. The project involves over 200 researchers and produced the first image of a black hole in 2019. (credit: EHT
Collaboration/NASA APOD)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 203
4 • Glossary 185
Glossary
acceleration the rate at which an object’s velocity to accelerate
changes over a period of time Newton’s first law of motion a body at rest remains
carrier particle a fundamental particle of nature that at rest, or, if in motion, remains in motion at a
is surrounded by a characteristic force field; constant velocity unless acted on by a net external
photons are carrier particles of the electromagnetic force; also known as the law of inertia
force Newton’s second law of motion the net external
dynamics the study of how forces affect the motion force on an object with mass is proportional
of objects and systems to and in the same direction as the acceleration of
external force a force acting on an object or system the object, , and inversely proportional to the
that originates outside of the object or system mass; defined mathematically as
force a push or pull on an object with a specific
Newton’s third law of motion whenever one body
magnitude and direction; can be represented by
exerts a force on a second body, the first body
vectors; can be expressed as a multiple of a
experiences a force that is equal in magnitude and
standard force
opposite in direction to the force that the first body
force field a region in which a test particle will
exerts
experience a force
normal force the force that a surface applies to an
free-body diagram a sketch showing all of the
object to support the weight of the object; acts
external forces acting on an object or system; the
perpendicular to the surface on which the object
system is represented by a dot, and the forces are
rests
represented by vectors extending outward from the
system defined by the boundaries of an object or
dot
collection of objects being observed; all forces
free-fall a situation in which the only force acting on
originating from outside of the system are
an object is the force due to gravity
considered external forces
friction a force past each other of objects that are
tension the pulling force that acts along a medium,
touching; examples include rough surfaces and air
especially a stretched flexible connector, such as a
resistance
rope or cable; when a rope supports the weight of
inertia the tendency of an object to remain at rest or
an object, the force on the object due to the rope is
remain in motion
called a tension force
inertial frame of reference a coordinate system that
thrust a reaction force that pushes a body forward in
is not accelerating; all forces acting in an inertial
response to a backward force; rockets, airplanes,
frame of reference are real forces, as opposed to
and cars are pushed forward by a thrust reaction
fictitious forces that are observed due to an
force
accelerating frame of reference
weight the force due to gravity acting on an object
law of inertia see Newton’s first law of motion
of mass ; defined mathematically as: ,
mass the quantity of matter in a substance;
where is the magnitude and direction of the
measured in kilograms
acceleration due to gravity
net external force the vector sum of all external
forces acting on an object or system; causes a mass
Section Summary
4.1Development of Force Concept 4.2Newton’s First Law of Motion: Inertia
• Dynamicsis the study of how forces affect the • Newton’s first law of motionstates that a body at
motion of objects. rest remains at rest, or, if in motion, remains in
• Forceis a push or pull that can be defined in terms motion at a constant velocity unless acted on by a
of various standards, and it is a vector having both net external force. This is also known as thelaw of
magnitude and direction. inertia.
• External forcesare any outside forces that act on • Inertiais the tendency of an object to remain at
a body. Afree-body diagramis a drawing of all rest or remain in motion. Inertia is related to an
external forces acting on a body. object’s mass.
• Massis the quantity of matter in a substance.
PAGE: 204
186 4 • Section Summary
4.3Newton’s Second Law of Motion: of the object can be resolved into components that
Concept of a System act perpendicular ( ) and parallel ( )to the
surface of the plane. These components can be
• Acceleration, , is defined as a change in velocity,
calculated using:
meaning a change in its magnitude or direction, or
both.
• An external force is one acting on a system from
• The pulling force that acts along a stretched
outside the system, as opposed to internal forces,
flexible connector, such as a rope or cable, is
which act between components within the system.
called tension, . When a rope supports the
• Newton’s second law of motion states that the
weight of an object that is at rest, the tension in
acceleration of a system is directly proportional to
the rope is equal to the weight of the object:
and in the same direction as the net external force
acting on the system, and inversely proportional to
• In any inertial frame of reference (one that is not
its mass.
accelerated or rotated), Newton’s laws have the
• In equation form, Newton’s second law of motion
simple forms given in this chapter and all forces
is .
are real forces having a physical origin.
• This is often written in the more familiar form:
4.6Problem-Solving Strategies
.
• The weight of an object is defined as the force of
• To solve problems involving Newton’s laws of
gravity acting on an object of mass . The object
motion, follow the procedure described:
experiences an acceleration due to gravity :
1. Draw a sketch of the problem.
2. Identify known and unknown quantities, and
• If the only force acting on an object is due to
identify the system of interest. Draw a free-
gravity, the object is in free fall.
body diagram, which is a sketch showing all of
• Friction is a force that opposes the motion past
the forces acting on an object. The object is
each other of objects that are touching.
represented by a dot, and the forces are
4.4Newton’s Third Law of Motion: represented by vectors extending in different
Symmetry in Forces directions from the dot. If vectors act in
directions that are not horizontal or vertical,
• Newton’s third law of motionrepresents a basic resolve the vectors into horizontal and vertical
symmetry in nature. It states: Whenever one body components and draw them on the free-body
exerts a force on a second body, the first body diagram.
experiences a force that is equal in magnitude and 3. Write Newton’s second law in the horizontal
opposite in direction to the force that the first body and vertical directions and add the forces acting
exerts. on the object. If the object does not accelerate
• Athrustis a reaction force that pushes a body in a particular direction (for example, the
forward in response to a backward force. Rockets, -direction) then . If the object does
airplanes, and cars are pushed forward by a thrust accelerate in that direction, .
reaction force. 4. Check your answer. Is the answer reasonable?
Are the units correct?
4.5Normal, Tension, and Other Examples of
Forces 4.7Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
of Motion
• When objects rest on a surface, the surface applies
a force to the object that supports the weight of • Newton’s laws of motion can be applied in
the object. This supporting force acts numerous situations to solve problems of motion.
perpendicular to and away from the surface. It is • Some problems will contain multiple force vectors
called a normal force, . acting in different directions on an object. Be sure
• When objects rest on a non-accelerating horizontal to draw diagrams, resolve all force vectors into
surface, the magnitude of the normal force is equal horizontal and vertical components, and draw a
to the weight of the object: free-body diagram. Always analyze the direction in
which an object accelerates so that you can
• When objects rest on an inclined plane that makes determine whether or .
an angle with the horizontal surface, the weight • The normal force on an object is not always equal
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 205
4 • Conceptual Questions 187
in magnitude to the weight of the object. If an use in many applications are all manifestations of
object is accelerating, the normal force will be less thefour basic forcesin nature.
than or greater than the weight of the object. Also, • The properties of these forces are summarized in
if the object is on an inclined plane, the normal Table 4.1.
force will always be less than the full weight of the • Everything we experience directly without
object. sensitive instruments is due to either
• Some problems will contain various physical electromagnetic forces or gravitational forces. The
quantities, such as forces, acceleration, velocity, or nuclear forces are responsible for the
position. You can apply concepts from kinematics submicroscopic structure of matter, but they are
and dynamics in order to solve these problems of not directly sensed because of their short ranges.
motion. Attempts are being made to show all four forces
are different manifestations of a single unified
4.8Extended Topic: The Four Basic
force.
Forces—An Introduction
• A force field surrounds an object creating a force
• The various types of forces that are categorized for and is the carrier of that force.
Conceptual Questions
4.1Development of Force Concept 11. (a) Give an example of different net external
forces acting on the same system to produce
1. Propose a force standard different from the
different accelerations. (b) Give an example of the
example of a stretched spring discussed in the text.
same net external force acting on systems of
Your standard must be capable of producing the
different masses, producing different
same force repeatedly.
accelerations. (c) What law accurately describes
2. What properties do forces have that allow us to
both effects? State it in words and as an equation.
classify them as vectors?
12. If the acceleration of a system is zero, are no
external forces acting on it? What about internal
4.2Newton’s First Law of Motion: Inertia
forces? Explain your answers.
3. How are inertia and mass related? 13. If a constant, nonzero force is applied to an object,
4. What is the relationship between weight and mass? what can you say about the velocity and
Which is an intrinsic, unchanging property of a acceleration of the object?
body? 14. The gravitational force on the basketball inFigure
4.6is ignored. When gravityistaken into account,
4.3Newton’s Second Law of Motion: what is the direction of the net external force on
Concept of a System the basketball—above horizontal, below
horizontal, or still horizontal?
5. Which statement is correct? (a) Net force causes
motion. (b) Net force causes change in motion. 4.4Newton’s Third Law of Motion:
Explain your answer and give an example.
Symmetry in Forces
6. Why can we neglect forces such as those holding a
body together when we apply Newton’s second law 15. When you take off in a jet aircraft, there is a
of motion? sensation of being pushed back into the seat.
7. Explain how the choice of the “system of interest” Explain why you move backward in the seat—is
affects which forces must be considered when there really a force backward on you? (The same
applying Newton’s second law of motion. reasoning explains whiplash injuries, in which the
8. Describe a situation in which the net external force head is apparently thrown backward.)
on a system is not zero, yet its speed remains 16. A device used since the 1940s to measure the
constant. kick or recoil of the body due to heart beats is the
9. A system can have a nonzero velocity while the net “ballistocardiograph.” What physics principle(s)
external force on itiszero. Describe such a are involved here to measure the force of cardiac
situation. contraction? How might we construct such a
10. A rock is thrown straight up. What is the net device?
external force acting on the rock when it is at the
top of its trajectory?
PAGE: 206
188 4 • Conceptual Questions
17. Describe a situation in which one system exerts a 22. In a traction setup for a broken bone, with pulleys
force on another and, as a consequence, and rope available, how might we be able to
experiences a force that is equal in magnitude and increase the force along the tibia using the same
opposite in direction. Which of Newton’s laws of weight? (SeeFigure 4.29.) (Note that the tibia is
motion apply? the shin bone shown in this image.)
18. Why does an ordinary rifle recoil (kick backward)
when fired? The barrel of a recoilless rifle is open 4.7Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
at both ends. Describe how Newton’s third law of Motion
applies when one is fired. Can you safely stand
23. To simulate the apparent weightlessness of space
close behind one when it is fired?
orbit, astronauts are trained in the hold of a cargo
19. An American football lineman reasons that it is
aircraft that is accelerating downward at . Why
senseless to try to out-push the opposing player,
will they appear to be weightless, as measured by
since no matter how hard he pushes he will
standing on a bathroom scale, in this accelerated
experience an equal and opposite force from the
frame of reference? Is there any difference
other player. Use Newton’s laws and draw a free-
between their apparent weightlessness in orbit
body diagram of an appropriate system to explain
and in the aircraft?
how he can still out-push the opposition if he is
24. A cartoon shows the hat coming off the head of an
strong enough.
elevator passenger when the elevator rapidly
20. Newton’s third law of motion tells us that forces
stops during an upward ride. Can this really
always occur in pairs of equal and opposite
happen without the person being tied to the floor
magnitude. Explain how the choice of the “system
of the elevator? Explain your answer.
of interest” affects whether one such pair of
forces cancels.
4.8Extended Topic: The Four Basic
Forces—An Introduction
4.5Normal, Tension, and Other Examples of
Forces
25. Explain, in terms of the properties of the four basic
forces, why people notice the gravitational force
21. If a leg is suspended by a traction setup as shown
acting on their bodies if it is such a comparatively
inFigure 4.29, what is the tension in the rope?
weak force.
26. What is the dominant force between astronomical
objects? Why are the other three basic forces less
significant over these very large distances?
27. Give a detailed example of how the exchange of a
particle can result in anattractiveforce. (For
example, consider one child pulling a toy out of
the hands of another.)
FIGURE4.29A leg is suspended by a traction system in
which wires are used to transmit forces. Frictionless pulleys
change the direction of the forceTwithout changing its
magnitude.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 207
4 • Problems & Exercises 189
Problems & Exercises
4.3Newton’s Second Law of Motion: 7. (a) If the rocket sled shown inFigure 4.31starts
Concept of a System with only one rocket burning, what is the magnitude
of its acceleration? Assume that the mass of the
You may assume data taken from illustrations is
system is 2100 kg, the thrust T is N, and
accurate to three digits.
the force of friction opposing the motion is known
1. A 63.0-kg sprinter starts a race with an acceleration to be 650 N. (b) Why is the acceleration not one-
of . What is the net external force on him? fourth of what it is with all rockets burning?
2. If the sprinter from the previous problem
accelerates at that rate for 20 m, and then
maintains that velocity for the remainder of the
100-m dash, what will be his time for the race?
3. A cleaner pushes a 4.50-kg laundry cart in such a
way that the net external force on it is 60.0 N.
Calculate the magnitude of its acceleration.
FIGURE4.31
4. Since astronauts in orbit are apparently weightless,
a clever method of measuring their masses is 8. What is the deceleration of the rocket sled if it
needed to monitor their mass gains or losses to comes to rest in 1.1 s from a speed of 1000 km/h?
adjust diets. One way to do this is to exert a known (Such deceleration caused one test subject to black
force on an astronaut and measure the acceleration out and have temporary blindness.)
produced. Suppose a net external force of 50.0 N is 9. Suppose two children push horizontally, but in
exerted and the astronaut’s acceleration is exactly opposite directions, on a third child in a
measured to be . (a) Calculate her mass. wagon. The first child exerts a force of 75.0 N, the
(b) By exerting a force on the astronaut, the vehicle second a force of 90.0 N, friction is 12.0 N, and the
in which they orbit experiences an equal and mass of the third child plus wagon is 23.0 kg.
opposite force. Discuss how this would affect the a. What is the system of interest if the
measurement of the astronaut’s acceleration. acceleration of the child in the wagon is to be
Propose a method in which recoil of the vehicle is calculated?
avoided. b. Draw a free-body diagram, including all forces
5. InFigure 4.7, the net external force on the 24-kg acting on the system.
mower is stated to be 51 N. If the force of friction c. Calculate the acceleration.
opposing the motion is 24 N, what force (in d. What would the acceleration be if friction were
newtons) is the person exerting on the mower? 15.0 N?
Suppose the mower is moving at 1.5 m/s when the
10. A powerful motorcycle can produce an
force is removed. How far will the mower go
acceleration of while traveling at 90.0
before stopping?
km/h. At that speed the forces resisting motion,
6. The same rocket sled drawn inFigure 4.30is
including friction and air resistance, total 400 N.
decelerated at a rate of . What force is
(Air resistance is analogous to air friction. It
necessary to produce this deceleration? Assume
always opposes the motion of an object.) What is
that the rockets are off. The mass of the system is
the magnitude of the force the motorcycle exerts
2100 kg.
backward on the ground to produce its
acceleration if the mass of the motorcycle with
rider is 245 kg?
11. The rocket sled shown inFigure 4.32accelerates
at a rate of . Its passenger has a mass of
75.0 kg. (a) Calculate the horizontal component of
the force the seat exerts against his body.
Compare this with his weight by using a ratio. (b)
FIGURE4.30
Calculate the direction and magnitude of the total
force the seat exerts against his body.
PAGE: 208
190 4 • Problems & Exercises
4.5Normal, Tension, and Other Examples of
Forces
17. Two teams of nine members each engage in a tug
of war. Each of the first team’s members has an
average mass of 68 kg and exerts an average force
of 1350 N horizontally. Each of the second team’s
FIGURE4.32 members has an average mass of 73 kg and exerts
an average force of 1365 N horizontally. (a) What
12. Repeat the previous problem for the situation in
is magnitude of the acceleration of the two teams?
which the rocket sled decelerates at a rate of
(b) What is the tension in the section of rope
. In this problem, the forces are exerted
between the teams?
by the seat and restraining belts.
18. What force does a trampoline have to apply to a
13. The weight of an astronaut plus their space suit on
45.0-kg gymnast to accelerate her straight up at
the Moon is only 250 N. How much do they weigh
? Note that the answer is independent
on Earth? What is the mass on the Moon? On
of the velocity of the gymnast—she can be moving
Earth?
either up or down, or be stationary.
14. Suppose the mass of a fully loaded module in
19. (a) Calculate the tension in a vertical strand of
which astronauts take off from the Moon is 10,000
spider web if a spider of mass
kg. The thrust of its engines is 30,000 N. (a)
hangs motionless on it. (b) Calculate the tension in
Calculate its the magnitude of acceleration in a
a horizontal strand of spider web if the same
vertical takeoff from the Moon. (b) Could it lift off
spider sits motionless in the middle of it much like
from Earth? If not, why not? If it could, calculate
the tightrope walker inFigure 4.16. The strand
the magnitude of its acceleration.
sags at an angle of below the horizontal.
Compare this with the tension in the vertical
4.4Newton’s Third Law of Motion:
strand (find their ratio).
Symmetry in Forces
20. Suppose a 60.0-kg gymnast climbs a rope. (a)
15. What net external force is exerted on a 1100-kg What is the tension in the rope if they climb at a
artillery shell fired from a battleship if the shell is constant speed? (b) What is the tension in the
accelerated at × ? What is the rope if they accelerate upward at a rate of
?
magnitude of the force exerted on the ship by the
21. Show that, as stated in the text, a force
artillery shell?
exerted on a flexible medium at its center and
16. A rugby player is being pushed backward by an
perpendicular to its length (such as on the
opposing player who is exerting a force of 800 N
tightrope wire inFigure 4.16) gives rise to a
on him. The mass of the losing player plus
equipment is 90.0 kg, and he is accelerating at tension of magnitude .
backward. (a) What is the force of 22. Consider the baby being weighed inFigure 4.33.
friction between the losing player’s feet and the (a) What is the mass of the child and basket if a
grass? (b) What force does the winning player scale reading of 55 N is observed? (b) What is the
exert on the ground to move forward if his mass tension in the cord attaching the baby to the
plus equipment is 110 kg? (c) Draw a sketch of the scale? (c) What is the tension in the cord
situation showing the system of interest used to attaching the scale to the ceiling, if the scale has a
solve each part. For this situation, draw a free- mass of 0.500 kg? (d) Draw a sketch of the
body diagram and write the net force equation. situation indicating the system of interest used to
solve each part. The masses of the cords are
negligible.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 209
4 • Problems & Exercises 191
26. When landing after a spectacular somersault, a
40.0-kg gymnast decelerates by pushing straight
down on the mat. Calculate the force she must
exert if her deceleration is 7.00 times the
acceleration due to gravity. Explicitly show how
you follow the steps in the Problem-Solving
Strategy for Newton’s laws of motion.
27. A freight train consists of two
engines and 45 cars with average masses of
. (a) What force must each engine
exert backward on the track to accelerate the train
at a rate of if the force of friction
is , assuming the engines exert
identical forces? This is not a large frictional force
for such a massive system. Rolling friction for
trains is small, and consequently trains are very
energy-efficient transportation systems. (b) What
is the force in the coupling between the 37th and
38th cars (this is the force each exerts on the
other), assuming all cars have the same mass and
that friction is evenly distributed among all of the
cars and engines?
28. Commercial airplanes are sometimes pushed out
of the passenger loading area by a tractor. (a) An
1800-kg tractor exerts a force of
backward on the pavement, and the system
experiences forces resisting motion that total
FIGURE4.33A baby is weighed using a spring scale. 2400 N. If the acceleration is , what is
the mass of the airplane? (b) Calculate the force
4.6Problem-Solving Strategies
exerted by the tractor on the airplane, assuming
2200 N of the friction is experienced by the
23. A rocket is accelerating straight up.
airplane. (c) Draw two sketches showing the
Its engines produce of thrust, and
systems of interest used to solve each part,
air resistance is . What is the
including the free-body diagrams for each.
rocket’s acceleration? Explicitly show how you
29. A 1100-kg car pulls a boat on a trailer. (a) What
follow the steps in the Problem-Solving Strategy
total force resists the motion of the car, boat, and
for Newton’s laws of motion.
trailer, if the car exerts a 1900-N force on the road
24. The wheels of a midsize car exert a force of 2100
and produces an acceleration of ? The
N backward on the road to accelerate the car in
mass of the boat plus trailer is 700 kg. (b) What is
the forward direction. If the force of friction
the force in the hitch between the car and the
including air resistance is 250 N and the
trailer if 80% of the resisting forces are
acceleration of the car is , what is the
experienced by the boat and trailer?
mass of the car plus its occupants? Explicitly show
30. (a) Find the magnitudes of the forces and
how you follow the steps in the Problem-Solving
that add to give the total force shown in
Strategy for Newton’s laws of motion. For this
Figure 4.34. This may be done either graphically or
situation, draw a free-body diagram and write the
by using trigonometry. (b) Show graphically that
net force equation.
the same total force is obtained independent of
25. Calculate the force a 70.0-kg high jumper must
the order of addition of and . (c) Find the
exert on the ground to produce an upward
direction and magnitude of some other pair of
acceleration 4.00 times the acceleration due to
vectors that add to give . Draw these to scale
gravity. Explicitly show how you follow the steps in
on the same drawing used in part (b) or a similar
the Problem-Solving Strategy for Newton’s laws of
picture.
motion.
PAGE: 210
192 4 • Problems & Exercises
FIGURE4.34
31. Two children pull a third child on a snow saucer
sled exerting forces and as shown from
above inFigure 4.35. Find the acceleration of the
49.00-kg sled and child system. Note that the
direction of the frictional force is unspecified; it FIGURE4.37Braces are used to apply forces to teeth to realign
will be in the opposite direction of the sum of them. Shown in this figure are the tensions applied by the wire to
the protruding tooth. The total force applied to the tooth by the
and .
wire, , points straight toward the back of the mouth.
34. Figure 4.38shows Superhero and Trusty Sidekick
hanging motionless from a rope. Superhero’s mass
is 90.0 kg, while Trusty Sidekick’s is 55.0 kg, and
the mass of the rope is negligible. (a) Draw a free-
body diagram of the situation showing all forces
acting on Superhero, Trusty Sidekick, and the
rope. (b) Find the tension in the rope above
Superhero. (c) Find the tension in the rope
between Superhero and Trusty Sidekick. Indicate
on your free-body diagram the system of interest
used to solve each part.
FIGURE4.35An overhead view of the horizontal forces acting on
a child’s snow saucer sled.
32. Suppose your car was mired deeply in the mud
and you wanted to use the method illustrated in
Figure 4.36to pull it out. (a) What force would you
have to exert perpendicular to the center of the
rope to produce a force of 12,000 N on the car if
the angle is 2.00°? In this part, explicitly show
how you follow the steps in the Problem-Solving
Strategy for Newton’s laws of motion. (b) Real
ropes stretch under such forces. What force would
be exerted on the car if the angle increases to
7.00° and you still apply the force found in part (a)
to its center?
FIGURE4.36
33. What force is exerted on the tooth inFigure 4.37if FIGURE4.38Superhero and Trusty Sidekick hang motionless on a
rope as they try to figure out what to do next. Will the tension be
the tension in the wire is 25.0 N? Note that the
the same everywhere in the rope?
force applied to the tooth is smaller than the
tension in the wire, but this is necessitated by
practical considerations of how force can be
applied in the mouth. Explicitly show how you
follow steps in the Problem-Solving Strategy for
Newton’s laws of motion.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 211
4 • Problems & Exercises 193
35. A nurse pushes a cart by exerting a force on the 4.7Further Applications of Newton’s Laws
handle at a downward angle below the of Motion
horizontal. The loaded cart has a mass of 28.0 kg,
40. A flea jumps by exerting a force of
and the force of friction is 60.0 N. (a) Draw a free-
straight down on the ground. A breeze blowing on
body diagram for the system of interest. (b) What
the flea parallel to the ground exerts a force of
force must the nurse exert to move at a constant
on the flea. Find the direction
velocity?
and magnitude of the acceleration of the flea if its
36. Construct Your Own ProblemConsider the tension
mass is . Do not neglect the
in an elevator cable during the time the elevator
gravitational force.
starts from rest and accelerates its load upward to
41. Two muscles in the back of the leg pull upward on
some cruising velocity. Taking the elevator and its
the Achilles tendon, as shown inFigure 4.39.
load to be the system of interest, draw a free-body
(These muscles are called the medial and lateral
diagram. Then calculate the tension in the cable.
heads of the gastrocnemius muscle.) Find the
Among the things to consider are the mass of the
magnitude and direction of the total force on the
elevator and its load, the final velocity, and the
Achilles tendon. What type of movement could be
time taken to reach that velocity.
caused by this force?
37. Construct Your Own ProblemConsider two people
pushing a toboggan with four children on it up a
snow-covered slope. Construct a problem in which
you calculate the acceleration of the toboggan and
its load. Include a free-body diagram of the
appropriate system of interest as the basis for
your analysis. Show vector forces and their
components and explain the choice of
coordinates. Among the things to be considered
are the forces exerted by those pushing, the angle
of the slope, and the masses of the toboggan and
children.
38. Unreasonable Results(a) RepeatExercise 4.29,
but assume an acceleration of is
produced. (b) What is unreasonable about the
result? (c) Which premise is unreasonable, and
why is it unreasonable?
39. Unreasonable Results(a) What is the initial
acceleration of a rocket that has a mass of FIGURE4.39Achilles tendon
at takeoff, the engines of which
42. A 76.0-kg person is being pulled away from a
produce a thrust of ? Do not neglect burning building as shown inFigure 4.40.
gravity. (b) What is unreasonable about the result? Calculate the tension in the two ropes if the
(This result has been unintentionally achieved by person is momentarily motionless. Include a free-
several real rockets.) (c) Which premise is body diagram in your solution.
unreasonable, or which premises are
inconsistent? (You may find it useful to compare
this problem to the rocket problem earlier in this
section.)
PAGE: 212
194 4 • Problems & Exercises
47. Integrated ConceptsA 2.50-kg fireworks shell is
fired straight up from a mortar and reaches a
height of 110 m. (a) Neglecting air resistance (a
poor assumption, but we will make it for this
example), calculate the shell’s velocity when it
leaves the mortar. (b) The mortar itself is a tube
0.450 m long. Calculate the average acceleration
of the shell in the tube as it goes from zero to the
velocity found in (a). (c) What is the average force
on the shell in the mortar? Express your answer in
newtons and as a ratio to the weight of the shell.
48. Integrated ConceptsRepeatExercise 4.47for a
shell fired at an angle from the vertical.
49. Integrated ConceptsAn elevator filled with
passengers has a mass of 1700 kg. (a) The
elevator accelerates upward from rest at a rate of
for 1.50 s. Calculate the tension in the
FIGURE4.40The force needed to hold steady the person
being rescued from the fire is less than her weight and less than cable supporting the elevator. (b) The elevator
the force in the other rope, since the more vertical rope continues upward at constant velocity for 8.50 s.
supports a greater part of her weight (a vertical force).
What is the tension in the cable during this time?
43. Integrated ConceptsA 35.0-kg dolphin (c)The elevator decelerates at a rate of
decelerates from 12.0 to 7.50 m/s in 2.30 s to join for 3.00 s. What is the tension in the
another dolphin in play. What average force was cable during deceleration? (d) How high has the
exerted to slow him if he was moving horizontally? elevator moved above its original starting point,
(The gravitational force is balanced by the buoyant and what is its final velocity?
force of the water.) 50. Unreasonable Results(a) What is the final velocity
44. Integrated ConceptsWhen starting a foot race, a of a car originally traveling at 50.0 km/h that
70.0-kg sprinter exerts an average force of 650 N decelerates at a rate of for 50.0 s? (b)
backward on the ground for 0.800 s. (a) What is What is unreasonable about the result? (c) Which
his final speed? (b) How far does he travel? premise is unreasonable, or which premises are
45. Integrated ConceptsA large rocket has a mass of inconsistent?
at takeoff, and its engines produce 51. Unreasonable ResultsA 75.0-kg man stands on a
a thrust of . (a) Find its initial bathroom scale in an elevator that accelerates
acceleration if it takes off vertically. (b) How long from rest to 30.0 m/s in 2.00 s. (a) Calculate the
does it take to reach a velocity of 120 km/h scale reading in newtons and compare it with his
straight up, assuming constant mass and thrust? weight. (The scale exerts an upward force on him
(c)In reality, the mass of a rocket decreases equal to its reading.) (b) What is unreasonable
significantly as its fuel is consumed. Describe about the result? (c) Which premise is
qualitatively how this affects the acceleration and unreasonable, or which premises are
time for this motion. inconsistent?
46. Integrated ConceptsA basketball player jumps
straight up for a ball. To do this, they lower their
body 0.300 m and then accelerate through this
distance by forcefully straightening their legs. This
player leaves the floor with a vertical velocity
sufficient to carry the player 0.900 m above the
floor. (a) Calculate the player's velocity when they
leave the floor. (b) Calculate their acceleration
while they are straightening their legs. They go
from zero to the velocity found in part (a) in a
distance of 0.300 m. (c) Calculate the force they
exert on the floor to do this, given that their mass
is 110 kg.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 213
4 • Problems & Exercises 195
4.8Extended Topic: The Four Basic 54. What is the ratio of the strength of the strong
Forces—An Introduction nuclear force to that of the electromagnetic force?
Based on this ratio, you might expect that the
52. (a) What is the strength of the weak nuclear force
strong force dominates the nucleus, which is true
relative to the strong nuclear force? (b) What is the
for small nuclei. Large nuclei, however, have sizes
strength of the weak nuclear force relative to the
greater than the range of the strong nuclear force.
electromagnetic force? Since the weak nuclear
At these sizes, the electromagnetic force begins to
force acts at only very short distances, such as
affect nuclear stability. These facts will be used to
inside nuclei, where the strong and
explain nuclear fusion and fission later in this text.
electromagnetic forces also act, it might seem
55. Critical ThinkingTwo boxes of equal mass slide
surprising that we have any knowledge of it at all.
start from rest and slide with different horizontal
We have such knowledge because the weak
applied forces across frictionless surfaces to
nuclear force is responsible for beta decay, a type
reach the same distance away. Box A has a
of nuclear decay not explained by other forces.
horizontal force of three times that of box B. (a)
53. (a) What is the ratio of the strength of the
Which box is traveling faster at this distance away
gravitational force to that of the strong nuclear
from the starting point? Briefly explain your
force? (b) What is the ratio of the strength of the
reasoning. (b) Based on experimental data, an
gravitational force to that of the weak nuclear
equation that fits the data is suggested for the
force? (c) What is the ratio of the strength of the
final speed,V, which may not be correct:
gravitational force to that of the electromagnetic
, whereKis a constant with appropriate
force? What do your answers imply about the
units andFis the horizontal applied force. Is this
influence of the gravitational force on atomic
equation consistent with your answer from part a?
nuclei?
Explain why or why not. Does this equation make
sense? Explain why or why not. (c) Now the
applied force can be any value and the distance
from the starting point is measured when the
speed gets to a consistent value. Graph the
distance the box gets to at a given speed as a
function of the applied force.
PAGE: 214
196 4 • Problems & Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 215
CHAPTER 5
Further Applications of Newton's Laws:
Friction, Drag, and Elasticity
FIGURE5.1Total hip replacement surgery has become a common procedure. The head (or ball) of the patient’s femur fits into a cup that
has a hard plastic-like inner lining. (credit: National Institutes of Health, via Wikimedia Commons)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
5.1Friction
5.2Drag Forces
5.3Elasticity: Stress and Strain
INTRODUCTION: FURTHER APPLICATIONS OF NEWTON’S LAWS Describe the forces on the hip joint. What
means are taken to ensure that this will be a good movable joint? From the photograph (for an adult) inFigure 5.1,
estimate the dimensions of the artificial device.
It is difficult to categorize forces into various types (aside from the four basic forces discussed in previous chapter).
We know that a net force affects the motion, position, and shape of an object. It is useful at this point to look at
some particularly interesting and common forces that will provide further applications of Newton’s laws of motion.
We have in mind the forces of friction, air or liquid drag, and deformation.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/5-introduction-further-applications-of-
newtons-laws)
PAGE: 216
198 5 • Further Applications of Newton's Laws: Friction, Drag, and Elasticity
5.1 Friction
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Discuss the general characteristics of friction.
• Describe the various types of friction.
• Calculate the magnitude of static and kinetic friction.
Frictionis a force that is around us all the time that opposes relative motion between surfaces in contact but also
allows us to move (which you have discovered if you have ever tried to walk on ice). While a common force, the
behavior of friction is actually very complicated and is still not completely understood. We have to rely heavily on
observations for whatever understandings we can gain. However, we can still deal with its more elementary general
characteristics and understand the circumstances in which it behaves.
Friction
Friction is a force that opposes relative motion between surfaces in contact.
One of the simpler characteristics of friction is that it is parallel to the contact surface between surfaces and always
in a direction that opposes motion or attempted motion of the systems relative to each other. If two surfaces are in
contact and moving relative to one another, then the friction between them is calledkinetic friction. For example,
friction slows a hockey puck sliding on ice. But when objects are stationary,static frictioncan act between them;
the static friction is usually greater than the kinetic friction between the surfaces.
Kinetic Friction
If two surfaces are in contact and moving relative to one another, then the friction between them is called kinetic
friction.
Imagine, for example, trying to slide a heavy crate across a concrete floor—you may push harder and harder on the
crate and not move it at all. This means that the static friction responds to what you do—it increases to be equal to
and in the opposite direction of your push. But if you finally push hard enough, the crate seems to slip suddenly and
starts to move. Once in motion it is easier to keep it in motion than it was to get it started, indicating that the kinetic
friction force is less than the static friction force. If you add mass to the crate, say by placing a box on top of it, you
need to push even harder to get it started and also to keep it moving. Furthermore, if you oiled the concrete you
would find it to be easier to get the crate started and keep it going (as you might expect).
Figure 5.2is a crude pictorial representation of how friction occurs at the interface between two objects. Close-up
inspection of these surfaces shows them to be rough. So when you push to get an object moving (in this case, a
crate), you must raise the object until it can skip along with just the tips of the surface hitting, break off the points, or
do both. A considerable force can be resisted by friction with no apparent motion. The harder the surfaces are
pushed together (such as if another box is placed on the crate), the more force is needed to move them. Part of the
friction is due to adhesive forces between the surface molecules of the two objects, which explain the dependence
of friction on the nature of the substances. Adhesion varies with substances in contact and is a complicated aspect
of surface physics. Once an object is moving, there are fewer points of contact (fewer molecules adhering), so less
force is required to keep the object moving. At small but nonzero speeds, friction is nearly independent of speed.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 217
5.1 • Friction 199
FIGURE5.2Frictional forces, such as , always oppose motion or attempted motion between surfaces in contact. Friction arises in part
because of the roughness of the surfaces in contact, as seen in the expanded view. In order for the object to move, it must rise to where the
peaks can skip along the bottom surface. Thus a force is required just to set the object in motion. Some of the peaks will be broken off, also
requiring a force to maintain motion. Much of the friction is actually due to attractive forces between molecules making up the two objects,
so that even perfectly smooth surfaces are not friction-free. Such adhesive forces also depend on the substances the surfaces are made of,
explaining, for example, why rubber-soled shoes slip less than those with leather soles.
The magnitude of the frictional force has two forms: one for static situations (static friction), the other for when
there is motion (kinetic friction).
When there is no motion between the objects, themagnitude of static friction is
5.1
where is the coefficient of static friction and is the magnitude of the normal force(the force perpendicular to
the surface).
Magnitude of Static Friction
Magnitude of static friction is
5.2
where is the coefficient of static friction and is the magnitude of the normal force.
The symbol meansless than or equal to, implying that static friction can have a minimum and a maximum value of
. Static friction is a responsive force that increases to be equal and opposite to whatever force is exerted, up to
its maximum limit. Once the applied force exceeds , the object will move. Thus
5.3
Once an object is moving, themagnitude of kinetic friction is given by
5.4
where is the coefficient of kinetic friction. A system in which is described as a system in whichfriction
behaves simply.
Magnitude of Kinetic Friction
The magnitude of kinetic friction is given by
5.5
where is the coefficient of kinetic friction.
As seen inTable 5.1, the coefficients of kinetic friction are less than their static counterparts. That values of in
Table 5.1are stated to only one or, at most, two digits is an indication of the approximate description of friction
given by the above two equations.
PAGE: 218
200 5 • Further Applications of Newton's Laws: Friction, Drag, and Elasticity
System Static friction Kinetic friction
Rubber on dry concrete 1.0 0.7
Rubber on wet concrete 0.7 0.5
Wood on wood 0.5 0.3
Waxed wood on wet snow 0.14 0.1
Metal on wood 0.5 0.3
Steel on steel (dry) 0.6 0.3
Steel on steel (oiled) 0.05 0.03
Teflon on steel 0.04 0.04
Bone lubricated by synovial fluid 0.016 0.015
Shoes on wood 0.9 0.7
Shoes on ice 0.1 0.05
Ice on ice 0.1 0.03
Steel on ice 0.04 0.02
TABLE5.1Coefficients of Static and Kinetic Friction
The equations given earlierinclude the dependence of friction on materials and the normal force. The direction of
friction is always opposite that of motion, parallel to the surface between objects, and perpendicular to the normal
force. For example, if the crate you try to push (with a force parallel to the floor) has a mass of 100 kg, then the
normal force would be equal to its weight, , perpendicular to the floor. If
the coefficient of static friction is 0.45, you would have to exert a force parallel to the floor greater than
to move the crate. Once there is motion, friction is less and the coefficient
of kinetic friction might be 0.30, so that a force of only 290 N ( ) would keep it
moving at a constant speed. If the floor is lubricated, both coefficients are considerably less than they would be
without lubrication. Coefficient of friction is a unit less quantity with a magnitude usually between 0 and 1.0. The
coefficient of the friction depends on the two surfaces that are in contact.
Take-Home Experiment
Find a small plastic object (such as a food container) and slide it on a kitchen table by giving it a gentle tap. Now
spray water on the table, simulating a light shower of rain. What happens now when you give the object the
same-sized tap? Now add a few drops of (vegetable or olive) oil on the surface of the water and give the same
tap. What happens now? This latter situation is particularly important for drivers to note, especially after a light
rain shower. Why?
Many people have experienced the slipperiness of walking on ice. However, many parts of the body, especially the
joints, have much smaller coefficients of friction—often three or four times less than ice. A joint is formed by the
ends of two bones, which are connected by thick tissues. The knee joint is formed by the lower leg bone (the tibia)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 219
5.1 • Friction 201
and the thighbone (the femur). The hip is a ball (at the end of the femur) and socket (part of the pelvis) joint. The
ends of the bones in the joint are covered by cartilage, which provides a smooth, almost glassy surface. The joints
also produce a fluid (synovial fluid) that reduces friction and wear. A damaged or arthritic joint can be replaced by an
artificial joint (Figure 5.3). These replacements can be made of metals (stainless steel or titanium) or plastic
(polyethylene), also with very small coefficients of friction.
FIGURE5.3Artificial knee replacement is a procedure that has been performed for more than 20 years. In this figure, we see the post-op
X-rays of the right knee joint replacement. (credit: Mike Baird, Flickr)
Other natural lubricants include saliva produced in our mouths to aid in the swallowing process, and the slippery
mucus found between organs in the body, allowing them to move freely past each other during heartbeats, during
breathing, and when a person moves. Artificial lubricants are also common in hospitals and doctor’s clinics. For
example, when ultrasonic imaging is carried out, the gel that couples the transducer to the skin also serves to
lubricate the surface between the transducer and the skin—thereby reducing the coefficient of friction between the
two surfaces. This allows the transducer to move freely over the skin.
EXAMPLE 5.1
Skiing Exercise
A skier with a mass of 62 kg is sliding down a snowy slope. Find the coefficient of kinetic friction for the skier if
friction is known to be 45.0 N.
Strategy
The magnitude of kinetic friction was given in to be 45.0 N. Kinetic friction is related to the normal force as
; thus, the coefficient of kinetic friction can be found if we can find the normal force of the skier on a
slope. The normal force is always perpendicular to the surface, and since there is no motion perpendicular to the
surface, the normal force should equal the component of the skier’s weight perpendicular to the slope. (See the
skier and free-body diagram inFigure 5.4.)
PAGE: 220
202 5 • Further Applications of Newton's Laws: Friction, Drag, and Elasticity
FIGURE5.4The motion of the skier and friction are parallel to the slope and so it is most convenient to project all forces onto a coordinate
system where one axis is parallel to the slope and the other is perpendicular (axes shown to left of skier). (the normal force) is
perpendicular to the slope, and (the friction) is parallel to the slope, but (the skier’s weight) has components along both axes, namely
and . is equal in magnitude to , so there is no motion perpendicular to the slope. However, is less than in magnitude, so
there is acceleration down the slope (along thex-axis).
That is,
5.6
Substituting this into our expression for kinetic friction, we get
5.7
which can now be solved for the coefficient of kinetic friction .
Solution
Solving for gives
5.8
Substituting known values on the right-hand side of the equation,
5.9
Discussion
This result is a little smaller than the coefficient listed inTable 5.1for waxed wood on snow, but it is still reasonable
since values of the coefficients of friction can vary greatly. In situations like this, where an object of mass slides
down a slope that makes an angle with the horizontal, friction is given by . All objects will slide
down a slope with constant acceleration under these circumstances. Proof of this is left for this chapter’s Problems
and Exercises.
Take-Home Experiment
An object will slide down an inclined plane at a constant velocity if the net force on the object is zero. We can use
this fact to measure the coefficient of kinetic friction between two objects. As shown inExample 5.1, the kinetic
friction on a slope . The component of the weight down the slope is equal to (see the
free-body diagram inFigure 5.4). These forces act in opposite directions, so when they have equal magnitude,
the acceleration is zero. Writing these out:
5.10
5.11
Solving for , we find that
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 221
5.1 • Friction 203
5.12
Put a coin on a book and tilt it until the coin slides at a constant velocity down the book. You might need to tap
the book lightly to get the coin to move. Measure the angle of tilt relative to the horizontal and find . Note that
the coin will not start to slide at all until an angle greater than is attained, since the coefficient of static friction
is larger than the coefficient of kinetic friction. Discuss how this may affect the value for and its uncertainty.
We have discussed that when an object rests on a horizontal surface, there is a normal force supporting it equal in
magnitude to its weight. Furthermore, simple friction is always proportional to the normal force.
Making Connections: Submicroscopic Explanations of Friction
The simpler aspects of friction dealt with so far are its macroscopic (large-scale) characteristics. Great strides
have been made in the atomic-scale explanation of friction during the past several decades. Researchers are
finding that the atomic nature of friction seems to have several fundamental characteristics. These
characteristics not only explain some of the simpler aspects of friction—they also hold the potential for the
development of nearly friction-free environments that could save hundreds of billions of dollars in energy which
is currently being converted (unnecessarily) to heat.
Figure 5.5illustrates one macroscopic characteristic of friction that is explained by microscopic (small-scale)
research. We have noted that friction is proportional to the normal force, but not to the area in contact, a somewhat
counterintuitive notion. When two rough surfaces are in contact, the actual contact area is a tiny fraction of the total
area since only high spots touch. When a greater normal force is exerted, the actual contact area increases, and it is
found that the friction is proportional to this area.
FIGURE5.5Two rough surfaces in contact have a much smaller area of actual contact than their total area. When there is a greater normal
force as a result of a greater applied force, the area of actual contact increases as does friction.
But the atomic-scale view promises to explain far more than the simpler features of friction. The mechanism for how
heat is generated is now being determined. In other words, why do surfaces get warmer when rubbed? Essentially,
atoms are linked with one another to form lattices. When surfaces rub, the surface atoms adhere and cause atomic
lattices to vibrate—essentially creating sound waves that penetrate the material. The sound waves diminish with
distance and their energy is converted into heat. Chemical reactions that are related to frictional wear can also occur
between atoms and molecules on the surfaces.Figure 5.6shows how the tip of a probe drawn across another
material is deformed by atomic-scale friction. The force needed to drag the tip can be measured and is found to be
related to shear stress, which will be discussed later in this chapter. The variation in shear stress is remarkable
(more than a factor of ) and difficult to predict theoretically, but shear stress is yielding a fundamental
understanding of a large-scale phenomenon known since ancient times—friction.
PAGE: 222
204 5 • Further Applications of Newton's Laws: Friction, Drag, and Elasticity
FIGURE5.6The tip of a probe is deformed sideways by frictional force as the probe is dragged across a surface. Measurements of how the
force varies for different materials are yielding fundamental insights into the atomic nature of friction.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Forces and Motion
Explore the forces at work when you try to push a filing cabinet. Create an applied force and see the resulting friction
force and total force acting on the cabinet. Charts show the forces, position, velocity, and acceleration vs. time. Draw
a free-body diagram of all the forces (including gravitational and normal forces).
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/5-1-friction)
5.2 Drag Forces
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Express mathematically the drag force.
• Discuss the applications of drag force.
• Define terminal velocity.
• Determine the terminal velocity given mass.
Another interesting force in everyday life is the force of drag on an object when it is moving in a fluid (either a gas or
a liquid). You feel the drag force when you move your hand through water. You might also feel it if you move your
hand during a strong wind. The faster you move your hand, the harder it is to move. You feel a smaller drag force
when you tilt your hand so only the side goes through the air—you have decreased the area of your hand that faces
the direction of motion. Like friction, thedrag forcealways opposes the motion of an object. Unlike simple friction,
the drag force is proportional to some function of the velocity of the object in that fluid. This functionality is
complicated and depends upon the shape of the object, its size, its velocity, and the fluid it is in. For most large
objects such as bicyclists, cars, and baseballs not moving too slowly, the magnitude of the drag force is found to
be proportional to the square of the speed of the object. We can write this relationship mathematically as .
When taking into account other factors, this relationship becomes
5.13
where is the drag coefficient, is the area of the object facing the fluid, and is the density of the fluid. (Recall
that density is mass per unit volume.) This equation can also be written in a more generalized fashion as ,
where is a constant equivalent to . We have set the exponent for these equations as 2 because, when an
object is moving at high velocity through air, the magnitude of the drag force is proportional to the square of the
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 223
5.2 • Drag Forces 205
speed. As we shall see in a few pages on fluid dynamics, for small particles moving at low speeds in a fluid, the
exponent is equal to 1.
Drag Force
Drag force is found to be proportional to the square of the speed of the object. Mathematically
5.14
5.15
where is the drag coefficient, is the area of the object facing the fluid, and is the density of the fluid.
Athletes as well as car designers seek to reduce the drag force to lower their race times. (SeeFigure 5.7).
“Aerodynamic” shaping of an automobile can reduce the drag force and so increase a car’s gas mileage.
FIGURE5.7From racing cars to bobsled racers, aerodynamic shaping is crucial to achieving top speeds. Bobsleds are designed for speed.
They are shaped like a bullet with tapered fins. (credit: U.S. Army, via Wikimedia Commons)
The value of the drag coefficient, , is determined empirically, usually with the use of a wind tunnel. (SeeFigure
5.8).
FIGURE5.8NASA researchers test a model plane in a wind tunnel. (credit: NASA/Ames)
The drag coefficient can depend upon velocity, but we will assume that it is a constant here.Table 5.2lists some
typical drag coefficients for a variety of objects. Notice that the drag coefficient is a dimensionless quantity. At
highway speeds, over 50% of the power of a car is used to overcome air drag. The most fuel-efficient cruising speed
is about 70–80 km/h (about 45–50 mi/h). For this reason, during the 1970s oil crisis in the United States, maximum
speeds on highways were set at about 90 km/h (55 mi/h).
PAGE: 224
206 5 • Further Applications of Newton's Laws: Friction, Drag, and Elasticity
Object C
Airfoil 0.05
Toyota Camry 0.28
Ford Focus 0.32
Honda Civic 0.36
Ferrari Testarossa 0.37
Dodge Ram pickup 0.43
Sphere 0.45
Hummer H2 SUV 0.64
Skydiver (feet first) 0.70
Bicycle 0.90
Skydiver (horizontal) 1.0
Circular flat plate 1.12
TABLE5.2Drag Coefficient
Values Typical values of drag
coefficient .
Substantial research is under way in the sporting world to minimize drag. The dimples on golf balls are being
redesigned as are the clothes that athletes wear. Bicycle racers and some swimmers and runners wear full
bodysuits. Australian Cathy Freeman wore a full body suit in the 2000 Sydney Olympics, and won the gold medal for
the 400 m race. Many swimmers in the 2008 Beijing Olympics wore (Speedo) body suits; it might have made a
difference in breaking many world records (SeeFigure 5.9). Most elite swimmers (and cyclists) shave their body hair.
Such innovations can have the effect of slicing away milliseconds in a race, sometimes making the difference
between a gold and a silver medal. One consequence is that careful and precise guidelines must be continuously
developed to maintain the integrity of the sport.
FIGURE5.9Body suits, such as this LZR Racer Suit, have been credited with many world records after their release in 2008. Smoother
“skin” and more compression forces on a swimmer’s body provide at least 10% less drag. (credit: NASA/Kathy Barnstorff)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 225
5.2 • Drag Forces 207
Some interesting situations connected to Newton’s second law occur when considering the effects of drag forces
upon a moving object. For instance, consider a skydiver falling through air under the influence of gravity. The two
forces acting on him are the force of gravity and the drag force (ignoring the buoyant force). The downward force of
gravity remains constant regardless of the velocity at which the person is moving. However, as the person’s velocity
increases, the magnitude of the drag force increases until the magnitude of the drag force is equal to the
gravitational force, thus producing a net force of zero. A zero net force means that there is no acceleration, as given
by Newton’s second law. At this point, the person’s velocity remains constant and we say that the person has
reached histerminal velocity( ). Since is proportional to the speed, a heavier skydiver must go faster for to
equal his weight. Let’s see how this works out more quantitatively.
At the terminal velocity,
5.16
Thus,
5.17
Using the equation for drag force, we have
5.18
Solving for the velocity, we obtain
5.19
Assume the density of air is . A 75-kg skydiver descending head first will have an area
approximately and a drag coefficient of approximately . We find that
5.20
This means a skydiver with a mass of 75 kg achieves a maximum terminal velocity of about 350 km/h while traveling
in a headfirst position, minimizing the area and his drag. In a spread-eagle position, that terminal velocity may
decrease to about 200 km/h as the area increases. This terminal velocity becomes much smaller after the parachute
opens.
Take-Home Experiment
This interesting activity examines the effect of weight upon terminal velocity. Gather together some nested
coffee filters. Leaving them in their original shape, measure the time it takes for one, two, three, four, and five
nested filters to fall to the floor from the same height (roughly 2 m). (Note that, due to the way the filters are
nested, drag is constant and only mass varies.) They obtain terminal velocity quite quickly, so find this velocity
as a function of mass. Plot the terminal velocity versus mass. Also plot versus mass. Which of these
relationships is more linear? What can you conclude from these graphs?
EXAMPLE 5.2
A Terminal Velocity
Find the terminal velocity of an 85-kg skydiver falling in a spread-eagle position.
Strategy
At terminal velocity, . Thus the drag force on the skydiver must equal the force of gravity (the person’s
PAGE: 226
208 5 • Further Applications of Newton's Laws: Friction, Drag, and Elasticity
weight). Using the equation of drag force, we find .
Thus the terminal velocity can be written as
5.21
Solution
All quantities are known except the person’s projected area. This is an adult (85 kg) falling spread eagle. We can
estimate the frontal area as
5.22
Using our equation for , we find that
5.23
Discussion
This result is consistent with the value for mentioned earlier. The 75-kg skydiver going feet first had a .
He weighed less but had a smaller frontal area and so a smaller drag due to the air.
The size of the object that is falling through air presents another interesting application of air drag. If you fall from a
5-m high branch of a tree, you will likely get hurt—possibly fracturing a bone. However, a small squirrel does this all
the time, without getting hurt. You don’t reach a terminal velocity in such a short distance, but the squirrel does.
The following interesting quote on animal size and terminal velocity is from a 1928 essay by a British biologist, J.B.S.
Haldane, titled “On Being the Right Size.”
To the mouse and any smaller animal, [gravity] presents practically no dangers. You can drop a mouse down a
thousand-yard mine shaft; and, on arriving at the bottom, it gets a slight shock and walks away, provided that the
ground is fairly soft. A rat is killed, a man is broken, and a horse splashes. For the resistance presented to movement
by the air is proportional to the surface of the moving object. Divide an animal’s length, breadth, and height each by
ten; its weight is reduced to a thousandth, but its surface only to a hundredth. So the resistance to falling in the case
of the small animal is relatively ten times greater than the driving force.
The above quadratic dependence of air drag upon velocity does not hold if the object is very small, is going very
slow, or is in a denser medium than air. Then we find that the drag force is proportional just to the velocity. This
relationship is given byStokes’ law, which states that
5.24
where is the radius of the object, is the viscosity of the fluid, and is the object’s velocity.
Stokes’ Law
5.25
where is the radius of the object, is the viscosity of the fluid, and is the object’s velocity.
Good examples of this law are provided by microorganisms, pollen, and dust particles. Because each of these
objects is so small, we find that many of these objects travel unaided only at a constant (terminal) velocity. Terminal
velocities for bacteria (size about ) can be about . To move at a greater speed, many bacteria swim using
flagella (organelles shaped like little tails) that are powered by little motors embedded in the cell. Sediment in a lake
can move at a greater terminal velocity (about ), so it can take days to reach the bottom of the lake after
being deposited on the surface.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 227
5.3 • Elasticity: Stress and Strain 209
If we compare animals living on land with those in water, you can see how drag has influenced evolution. Fishes,
dolphins, and even massive whales are streamlined in shape to reduce drag forces. Birds are streamlined and
migratory species that fly large distances often have particular features such as long necks. Flocks of birds fly in the
shape of a spear head as the flock forms a streamlined pattern (seeFigure 5.10). In humans, one important
example of streamlining is the shape of sperm, which need to be efficient in their use of energy.
FIGURE5.10Geese fly in a V formation during their long migratory travels. This shape reduces drag and energy consumption for individual
birds, and also allows them a better way to communicate. (credit: Julo, Wikimedia Commons)
Galileo’s Experiment
Galileo is said to have dropped two objects of different masses from the Tower of Pisa. He measured how long it
took each to reach the ground. Since stopwatches weren’t readily available, how do you think he measured their
fall time? If the objects were the same size, but with different masses, what do you think he should have
observed? Would this result be different if done on the Moon?
5.3 Elasticity: Stress and Strain
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• State Hooke’s law.
• Explain Hooke’s law using graphical representation between deformation and applied force.
• Discuss the three types of deformations such as changes in length, sideways shear and changes in
volume.
• Describe with examples the young’s modulus, shear modulus and bulk modulus.
• Determine the change in length given mass, length and radius.
We now move from consideration of forces that affect the motion of an object (such as friction and drag) to those
that affect an object’s shape. If a bulldozer pushes a car into a wall, the car will not move but it will noticeably
change shape. A change in shape due to the application of a force is adeformation. Even very small forces are
known to cause some deformation. For small deformations, two important characteristics are observed. First, the
object returns to its original shape when the force is removed—that is, the deformation is elastic for small
deformations. Second, the size of the deformation is proportional to the force—that is, for small deformations,
Hooke’s law is obeyed. In equation form,Hooke’s lawis given by
5.26
where is the amount of deformation (the change in length, for example) produced by the force , and is a
proportionality constant that depends on the shape and composition of the object and the direction of the force.
Note that this force is a function of the deformation —it is not constant as a kinetic friction force is. Rearranging
this to
5.27
PAGE: 228
210 5 • Further Applications of Newton's Laws: Friction, Drag, and Elasticity
makes it clear that the deformation is proportional to the applied force.Figure 5.11shows the Hooke’s law
relationship between the extension of a spring or of a human bone. For metals or springs, the straight line region
in which Hooke’s law pertains is much larger. Bones are brittle and the elastic region is small and the fracture
abrupt. Eventually a large enough stress to the material will cause it to break or fracture.Tensile strengthis the
breaking stress that will cause permanent deformation or fracture of a material.
Hooke’s Law
5.28
where is the amount of deformation (the change in length, for example) produced by the force , and is a
proportionality constant that depends on the shape and composition of the object and the direction of the force.
5.29
FIGURE5.11A graph of deformation versus applied force . The straight segment is the linear region where Hooke’s law is obeyed.
The slope of the straight region is . For larger forces, the graph is curved but the deformation is still elastic— will return to zero if the
force is removed. Still greater forces permanently deform the object until it finally fractures. The shape of the curve near fracture depends
on several factors, including how the force is applied. Note that in this graph the slope increases just before fracture, indicating that a
small increase in is producing a large increase in near the fracture.
The proportionality constant depends upon a number of factors for the material. For example, a guitar string made
of nylon stretches when it is tightened, and the elongation is proportional to the force applied (at least for small
deformations). Thicker nylon strings and ones made of steel stretch less for the same applied force, implying they
have a larger (seeFigure 5.12). Finally, all three strings return to their normal lengths when the force is removed,
provided the deformation is small. Most materials will behave in this manner if the deformation is less than about
0.1% or about 1 part in .
FIGURE5.12The same force, in this case a weight ( ), applied to three different guitar strings of identical length produces the three
different deformations shown as shaded segments. The string on the left is thin nylon, the one in the middle is thicker nylon, and the one on
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 229
5.3 • Elasticity: Stress and Strain 211
the right is steel.
Stretch Yourself a Little
How would you go about measuring the proportionality constant of a rubber band? If a rubber band stretched
3 cm when a 100-g mass was attached to it, then how much would it stretch if two similar rubber bands were
attached to the same mass—even if put together in parallel or alternatively if tied together in series?
We now consider three specific types of deformations: changes in length (tension and compression), sideways shear
(stress), and changes in volume. All deformations are assumed to be small unless otherwise stated.
Changes in Length—Tension and Compression: Elastic Modulus
A change in length is produced when a force is applied to a wire or rod parallel to its length , either stretching
it (a tension) or compressing it. (SeeFigure 5.13.)
FIGURE5.13(a) Tension. The rod is stretched a length when a force is applied parallel to its length. (b) Compression. The same rod is
compressed by forces with the same magnitude in the opposite direction. For very small deformations and uniform materials, is
approximately the same for the same magnitude of tension or compression. For larger deformations, the cross-sectional area changes as
the rod is compressed or stretched.
Experiments have shown that the change in length ( ) depends on only a few variables. As already noted, is
proportional to the force and depends on the substance from which the object is made. Additionally, the change in
length is proportional to the original length and inversely proportional to the cross-sectional area of the wire or
rod. For example, a long guitar string will stretch more than a short one, and a thick string will stretch less than a
thin one. We can combine all these factors into one equation for :
5.30
where is the change in length, the applied force, is a factor, called the elastic modulus or Young’s modulus,
that depends on the substance, is the cross-sectional area, and is the original length.Table 5.3lists values of
for several materials—those with a large are said to have a large tensile stiffness because they deform less for a
given tension or compression.
PAGE: 230
212 5 • Further Applications of Newton's Laws: Friction, Drag, and Elasticity
Young’s modulus Shear modulusS Bulk modulusB
Material
(tension–compression)Y
Aluminum 70 25 75
Bone – tension 16 80 8
Bone –
9
compression
Brass 90 35 75
Brick 15
Concrete 20
Glass 70 20 30
Granite 45 20 45
Hair (human) 10
Hardwood 15 10
Iron, cast 100 40 90
Lead 16 5 50
Marble 60 20 70
Nylon 5
Polystyrene 3
Silk 6
Spider thread 3
Steel 210 80 130
Tendon 1
Acetone 0.7
Ethanol 0.9
Glycerin 4.5
TABLE5.3Elastic Moduli 1
1 Approximate and average values. Young’s moduli for tension and compression sometimes differ but are averaged here. Bone has
significantly different Young’s moduli for tension and compression.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 231
5.3 • Elasticity: Stress and Strain 213
Young’s modulus Shear modulusS Bulk modulusB
Material
(tension–compression)Y
Mercury 25
Water 2.2
TABLE5.3Elastic Moduli 1
Young’s moduli are not listed for liquids and gases inTable 5.3because they cannot be stretched or compressed in
only one direction. Note that there is an assumption that the object does not accelerate, so that there are actually
two applied forces of magnitude acting in opposite directions. For example, the strings inFigure 5.13are being
pulled down by a force of magnitude and held up by the ceiling, which also exerts a force of magnitude .
EXAMPLE 5.3
The Stretch of a Long Cable
Suspension cables are used to carry gondolas at ski resorts. (SeeFigure 5.14) Consider a suspension cable that
includes an unsupported span of 3020 m. Calculate the amount of stretch in the steel cable. Assume that the cable
has a diameter of 5.6 cm and the maximum tension it can withstand is .
FIGURE5.14Gondolas travel along suspension cables at the Gala Yuzawa ski resort in Japan. (credit: Rudy Herman, Flickr)
Strategy
The force is equal to the maximum tension, or . The cross-sectional area is
. The equation can be used to find the change in length.
Solution
All quantities are known. Thus,
5.31
Discussion
This is quite a stretch, but only about 0.6% of the unsupported length. Effects of temperature upon length might be
important in these environments.
Bones, on the whole, do not fracture due to tension or compression. Rather they generally fracture due to sideways
impact or bending, resulting in the bone shearing or snapping. The behavior of bones under tension and
compression is important because it determines the load the bones can carry. Bones are classified as weight-
bearing structures such as columns in buildings and trees. Weight-bearing structures have special features; columns
in building have steel-reinforcing rods while trees and bones are fibrous. The bones in different parts of the body
serve different structural functions and are prone to different stresses. Thus the bone in the top of the femur is
PAGE: 232
214 5 • Further Applications of Newton's Laws: Friction, Drag, and Elasticity
arranged in thin sheets separated by marrow while in other places the bones can be cylindrical and filled with
marrow or just solid. Overweight people have a tendency toward bone damage due to sustained compressions in
bone joints and tendons.
Another biological example of Hooke’s law occurs in tendons. Functionally, the tendon (the tissue connecting
muscle to bone) must stretch easily at first when a force is applied, but offer a much greater restoring force for a
greater strain.Figure 5.15shows a stress-strain relationship for a human tendon. Some tendons have a high
collagen content so there is relatively little strain, or length change; others, like support tendons (as in the leg) can
change length up to 10%. Note that this stress-strain curve is nonlinear, since the slope of the line changes in
different regions. In the first part of the stretch called the toe region, the fibers in the tendon begin to align in the
direction of the stress—this is calleduncrimping. In the linear region, the fibrils will be stretched, and in the failure
region individual fibers begin to break. A simple model of this relationship can be illustrated by springs in parallel:
different springs are activated at different lengths of stretch. Examples of this are given in the problems at end of
this chapter. Ligaments (tissue connecting bone to bone) behave in a similar way.
FIGURE5.15Typical stress-strain curve for mammalian tendon. Three regions are shown: (1) toe region (2) linear region, and (3) failure
region.
Unlike bones and tendons, which need to be strong as well as elastic, the arteries and lungs need to be very
stretchable. The elastic properties of the arteries are essential for blood flow. The pressure in the arteries increases
and arterial walls stretch when the blood is pumped out of the heart. When the aortic valve shuts, the pressure in
the arteries drops and the arterial walls relax to maintain the blood flow. When you feel your pulse, you are feeling
exactly this—the elastic behavior of the arteries as the blood gushes through with each pump of the heart. If the
arteries were rigid, you would not feel a pulse. The heart is also an organ with special elastic properties. The lungs
expand with muscular effort when we breathe in but relax freely and elastically when we breathe out. Our skins are
particularly elastic, especially for the young. A young person can go from 100 kg to 60 kg with no visible sag in their
skins. The elasticity of all organs reduces with age. Gradual physiological aging through reduction in elasticity starts
in the early 20s.
EXAMPLE 5.4
Calculating Deformation: How Much Does Your Leg Shorten When You Stand on It?
Calculate the change in length of the upper leg bone (the femur) when a 70.0 kg man supports 62.0 kg of his mass
on it, assuming the bone to be equivalent to a uniform rod that is 40.0 cm long and 2.00 cm in radius.
Strategy
The force is equal to the weight supported, or
5.32
and the cross-sectional area is . The equation can be used to find the
change in length.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 233
5.3 • Elasticity: Stress and Strain 215
Solution
All quantities except are known. Note that the compression value for Young’s modulus for bone must be used
here. Thus,
5.33
Discussion
This small change in length seems reasonable, consistent with our experience that bones are rigid. In fact, even the
rather large forces encountered during strenuous physical activity do not compress or bend bones by large amounts.
Although bone is rigid compared with fat or muscle, several of the substances listed inTable 5.3have larger values
of Young’s modulus . In other words, they are more rigid.
The equation for change in length is traditionally rearranged and written in the following form:
5.34
The ratio of force to area, , is defined asstress(measured in ), and the ratio of the change in length to
length, , is defined asstrain(a unitless quantity). In other words,
5.35
In this form, the equation is analogous to Hooke’s law, with stress analogous to force and strain analogous to
deformation. If we again rearrange this equation to the form
5.36
we see that it is the same as Hooke’s law with a proportionality constant
5.37
This general idea—that force and the deformation it causes are proportional for small deformations—applies to
changes in length, sideways bending, and changes in volume.
Stress
The ratio of force to area, , is defined as stress measured in N/m2.
Strain
The ratio of the change in length to length, , is defined as strain (a unitless quantity). In other words,
5.38
Sideways Stress: Shear Modulus
Figure 5.16illustrates what is meant by a sideways stress or ashearing force. Here the deformation is called and
it is perpendicular to , rather than parallel as with tension and compression. Shear deformation behaves similarly
to tension and compression and can be described with similar equations. The expression forshear deformationis
5.39
PAGE: 234
216 5 • Further Applications of Newton's Laws: Friction, Drag, and Elasticity
where is the shear modulus (seeTable 5.3) and is the force applied perpendicular to and parallel to the
cross-sectional area . Again, to keep the object from accelerating, there are actually two equal and opposite forces
applied across opposite faces, as illustrated inFigure 5.16. The equation is logical—for example, it is easier to
bend a long thin pencil (small ) than a short thick one, and both are more easily bent than similar steel rods (large
).
Shear Deformation
5.40
where is the shear modulus and is the force applied perpendicular to and parallel to the cross-sectional
area .
FIGURE5.16Shearing forces are applied perpendicular to the length and parallel to the area , producing a deformation . Vertical
forces are not shown, but it should be kept in mind that in addition to the two shearing forces, , there must be supporting forces to keep
the object from rotating. The distorting effects of these supporting forces are ignored in this treatment. The weight of the object also is not
shown, since it is usually negligible compared with forces large enough to cause significant deformations.
Examination of the shear moduli inTable 5.3reveals some telling patterns. For example, shear moduli are less than
Young’s moduli for most materials. Bone is a remarkable exception. Its shear modulus is not only greater than its
Young’s modulus, but it is as large as that of steel. This is why bones are so rigid.
The spinal column (consisting of 26 vertebral segments separated by discs) provides the main support for the head
and upper part of the body. The spinal column has normal curvature for stability, but this curvature can be
increased, leading to increased shearing forces on the lower vertebrae. Discs are better at withstanding
compressional forces than shear forces. Because the spine is not vertical, the weight of the upper body exerts some
of both. Pregnant women and people that are overweight (with large abdomens) need to move their shoulders back
to maintain balance, thereby increasing the curvature in their spine and so increasing the shear component of the
stress. An increased angle due to more curvature increases the shear forces along the plane. These higher shear
forces increase the risk of back injury through ruptured discs. The lumbosacral disc (the wedge shaped disc below
the last vertebrae) is particularly at risk because of its location.
The shear moduli for concrete and brick are very small; they are too highly variable to be listed. Concrete used in
buildings can withstand compression, as in pillars and arches, but is very poor against shear, as might be
encountered in heavily loaded floors or during earthquakes. Modern structures were made possible by the use of
steel and steel-reinforced concrete. Almost by definition, liquids and gases have shear moduli near zero, because
they flow in response to shearing forces.
EXAMPLE 5.5
Calculating Force Required to Deform: That Nail Does Not Bend Much Under a Load
Find the mass of the picture hanging from a steel nail as shown inFigure 5.17, given that the nail bends only
. (Assume the shear modulus is known to two significant figures.)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 235
5.3 • Elasticity: Stress and Strain 217
FIGURE5.17Side view of a nail with a picture hung from it. The nail flexes very slightly (shown much larger than actual) because of the
shearing effect of the supported weight. Also shown is the upward force of the wall on the nail, illustrating that there are equal and opposite
forces applied across opposite cross sections of the nail. SeeExample 5.5for a calculation of the mass of the picture.
Strategy
The force on the nail (neglecting the nail’s own weight) is the weight of the picture . If we can find , then the
mass of the picture is just . The equation can be solved for .
Solution
Solving the equation for , we see that all other quantities can be found:
5.41
Sis found inTable 5.3and is . The radius is 0.750 mm (as seen in the figure), so the cross-
sectional area is
5.42
The value for is also shown in the figure. Thus,
5.43
This 51 N force is the weight of the picture, so the picture’s mass is
5.44
Discussion
This is a fairly massive picture, and it is impressive that the nail flexes only —an amount undetectable to the
unaided eye.
Changes in Volume: Bulk Modulus
An object will be compressed in all directions if inward forces are applied evenly on all its surfaces as inFigure 5.18.
It is relatively easy to compress gases and extremely difficult to compress liquids and solids. For example, air in a
wine bottle is compressed when it is corked. But if you try corking a brim-full bottle, you cannot compress the
wine—some must be removed if the cork is to be inserted. The reason for these different compressibilities is that
atoms and molecules are separated by large empty spaces in gases but packed close together in liquids and solids.
To compress a gas, you must force its atoms and molecules closer together. To compress liquids and solids, you
must actually compress their atoms and molecules, and very strong electromagnetic forces in them oppose this
compression.
PAGE: 236
218 5 • Further Applications of Newton's Laws: Friction, Drag, and Elasticity
FIGURE5.18An inward force on all surfaces compresses this cube. Its change in volume is proportional to the force per unit area and its
original volume, and is related to the compressibility of the substance.
We can describe the compression or volume deformation of an object with an equation. First, we note that a force
“applied evenly” is defined to have the same stress, or ratio of force to area on all surfaces. The deformation
produced is a change in volume , which is found to behave very similarly to the shear, tension, and compression
previously discussed. (This is not surprising, since a compression of the entire object is equivalent to compressing
each of its three dimensions.) The relationship of the change in volume to other physical quantities is given by
5.45
where is the bulk modulus (seeTable 5.3), is the original volume, and is the force per unit area applied
uniformly inward on all surfaces. Note that no bulk moduli are given for gases.
What are some examples of bulk compression of solids and liquids? One practical example is the manufacture of
industrial-grade diamonds by compressing carbon with an extremely large force per unit area. The carbon atoms
rearrange their crystalline structure into the more tightly packed pattern of diamonds. In nature, a similar process
occurs deep underground, where extremely large forces result from the weight of overlying material. Another
natural source of large compressive forces is the pressure created by the weight of water, especially in deep parts of
the oceans. Water exerts an inward force on all surfaces of a submerged object, and even on the water itself. At
great depths, water is measurably compressed, as the following example illustrates.
EXAMPLE 5.6
Calculating Change in Volume with Deformation: How Much Is Water Compressed at Great
Ocean Depths?
Calculate the fractional decrease in volume ( ) for seawater at 5.00 km depth, where the force per unit area is
.
Strategy
Equation is the correct physical relationship. All quantities in the equation except are known.
Solution
Solving for the unknown gives
5.46
Substituting known values with the value for the bulk modulus fromTable 5.3,
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 237
5.3 • Elasticity: Stress and Strain 219
5.47
Discussion
Although measurable, this is not a significant decrease in volume considering that the force per unit area is about
500 atmospheres (1 million pounds per square foot). Liquids and solids are extraordinarily difficult to compress.
Conversely, very large forces are created by liquids and solids when they try to expand but are constrained from
doing so—which is equivalent to compressing them to less than their normal volume. This often occurs when a
contained material warms up, since most materials expand when their temperature increases. If the materials are
tightly constrained, they deform or break their container. Another very common example occurs when water freezes.
Water, unlike most materials, expands when it freezes, and it can easily fracture a boulder, rupture a biological cell,
or crack an engine block that gets in its way.
Other types of deformations, such as torsion or twisting, behave analogously to the tension, shear, and bulk
deformations considered here.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Masses & Springs
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/5-3-elasticity-stress-and-strain)
PAGE: 238
220 5 • Glossary
Glossary
deformation change in shape due to the application to one another
of force magnitude of kinetic friction , where
drag force , found to be proportional to the square is the coefficient of kinetic friction
of the speed of the object; mathematically magnitude of static friction , where is
the coefficient of static friction and is the
magnitude of the normal force
shear deformation deformation perpendicular to the
original length of an object
static friction a force that opposes the motion of two
where is the drag coefficient, is the area of the
systems that are in contact and are not moving
object facing the fluid, and is the density of the
relative to one another
fluid
Stokes’ law , where is the radius of the
friction a force that opposes relative motion or
object, is the viscosity of the fluid, and is the
attempts at motion between systems in contact
object’s velocity
Hooke’s law proportional relationship between the
strain ratio of change in length to original length
force on a material and the deformation it
stress ratio of force to area
causes,
tensile strength the breaking stress that will cause
kinetic friction a force that opposes the motion of
permanent deformation or fraction of a material
two systems that are in contact and moving relative
Section Summary
5.1Friction given by Stokes’ law,
• Friction is a contact force between systems that
where is the radius of the object, is the fluid
opposes the motion or attempted motion between
viscosity, and is the object’s velocity.
them. Simple friction is proportional to the normal
force pushing the systems together. (A normal 5.3Elasticity: Stress and Strain
force is always perpendicular to the contact
• Hooke’s law is given by
surface between systems.) Friction depends on
both of the materials involved. The magnitude of
where is the amount of deformation (the
static friction between systems stationary
change in length), is the applied force, and is a
relative to one another is given by
proportionality constant that depends on the
shape and composition of the object and the
where is the coefficient of static friction, which
direction of the force. The relationship between
depends on both of the materials.
the deformation and the applied force can also be
• The kinetic friction force between systems
written as
moving relative to one another is given by
where is the coefficient of kinetic friction,
which also depends on both materials. where isYoung’s modulus, which depends on
the substance, is the cross-sectional area, and
5.2Drag Forces
is the original length.
• Drag forces acting on an object moving in a fluid
• The ratio of force to area, , is defined asstress,
oppose the motion. For larger objects (such as a
measured in N/m2.
baseball) moving at a velocity in air, the drag
• The ratio of the change in length to length, , is
force is given by
defined asstrain(a unitless quantity). In other
words,
where is the drag coefficient (typical values are
given inTable 5.2), is the area of the object • The expression for shear deformation is
facing the fluid, and is the fluid density.
• For small objects (such as a bacterium) moving in
a denser medium (such as water), the drag force is where is the shear modulus and is the force
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 239
5 • Conceptual Questions 221
applied perpendicular to and parallel to the
cross-sectional area .
where is the bulk modulus, is the original
• The relationship of the change in volume to other
volume, and is the force per unit area applied
physical quantities is given by
uniformly inward on all surfaces.
Conceptual Questions
5.1Friction 8. Why can a squirrel jump from a tree branch to the
ground and run away undamaged, while a human
1. Define normal force. What is its relationship to
could break a bone in such a fall?
friction when friction behaves simply?
2. The glue on a piece of tape can exert forces. Can
5.3Elasticity: Stress and Strain
these forces be a type of simple friction? Explain,
considering especially that tape can stick to vertical 9. The elastic properties of the arteries are essential
walls and even to ceilings. for blood flow. Explain the importance of this in
3. When you learn to drive, you discover that you need terms of the characteristics of the flow of blood
to let up slightly on the brake pedal as you come to (pulsating or continuous).
a stop or the car will stop with a jerk. Explain this in 10. What are you feeling when you feel your pulse?
terms of the relationship between static and kinetic Measure your pulse rate for 10 s and for 1 min. Is
friction. there a factor of 6 difference?
4. When you push a piece of chalk across a 11. Examine different types of shoes, including sports
chalkboard, it sometimes screeches because it shoes and thongs. In terms of physics, why are the
rapidly alternates between slipping and sticking to bottom surfaces designed as they are? What
the board. Describe this process in more detail, in differences will dry and wet conditions make for
particular explaining how it is related to the fact these surfaces?
that kinetic friction is less than static friction. (The 12. Would you expect your height to be different
same slip-grab process occurs when tires screech depending upon the time of day? Why or why not?
on pavement.) 13. Would you expect a large or small stress to be
required to deform a spider web? Why is this
5.2Drag Forces elasticity an important feature for a spider web?
14. Explain why pregnant women often suffer from
5. Athletes such as swimmers and bicyclists wear
back strain late in their pregnancy.
body suits in competition. Formulate a list of pros
15. An old carpenter’s trick to keep nails from bending
and cons of such suits.
when they are pounded into hard materials is to
6. Two expressions were used for the drag force
grip the center of the nail firmly with pliers. Why
experienced by a moving object in a liquid. One
does this help?
depended upon the speed, while the other was
16. When a glass bottle full of vinegar warms up, both
proportional to the square of the speed. In which
the vinegar and the glass expand, but vinegar
types of motion would each of these expressions be
expands significantly more with temperature than
more applicable than the other one?
glass. The bottle will break if it was filled to its
7. As cars travel, oil and gasoline leaks onto the road
tightly capped lid. Explain why, and also explain
surface. If a light rain falls, what does this do to the
how a pocket of air above the vinegar would
control of the car? Does a heavy rain make any
prevent the break. (This is the function of the air
difference?
above liquids in glass containers.)
Problems & Exercises
5.1Friction 2. (a) When rebuilding her car’s engine, a physics
major must exert 300 N of force to insert a dry steel
1. A physics major is cooking breakfast when he
piston into a steel cylinder. What is the magnitude
notices that the frictional force between his steel
of the normal force between the piston and
spatula and his Teflon frying pan is only 0.200 N.
cylinder? (b) What is the magnitude of the force
Knowing the coefficient of kinetic friction between
would she have to exert if the steel parts were
the two materials, he quickly calculates the normal
oiled?
force. What is it?
PAGE: 240
222 5 • Problems & Exercises
3. (a) What is the maximum frictional force in the knee 7. Consider the 65.0-kg ice skater being pushed by
joint of a person who supports 66.0 kg of her mass two others shown inFigure 5.19. (a) Find the
on that knee? (b) During strenuous exercise it is direction and magnitude of , the total force
possible to exert forces to the joints that are easily exerted on her by the others, given that the
ten times greater than the weight being supported. magnitudes and are 26.4 N and 18.6 N,
What is the maximum force of friction under such respectively. (b) What is her initial acceleration if
conditions? The frictional forces in joints are she is initially stationary and wearing steel-bladed
relatively small in all circumstances except when skates that point in the direction of ? (c) What is
the joints deteriorate, such as from injury or her acceleration assuming she is already moving in
arthritis. Increased frictional forces can cause the direction of ? (Remember that friction
further damage and pain. always acts in the direction opposite that of motion
4. Suppose you have a 120-kg wooden crate resting or attempted motion between surfaces in contact.)
on a wood floor. (a) What maximum force can you
exert horizontally on the crate without moving it?
(b) If you continue to exert this force once the crate
starts to slip, what will the magnitude of its
acceleration then be?
5. (a) If half of the weight of a small
utility truck is supported by its two
drive wheels, what is the magnitude of the
maximum acceleration it can achieve on dry
concrete? (b) Will a metal cabinet lying on the FIGURE5.19
wooden bed of the truck slip if it accelerates at this 8. Show that the acceleration of any object down a
rate? (c) Solve both problems assuming the truck frictionless incline that makes an angle with the
has four-wheel drive. horizontal is . (Note that this
6. A team of eight dogs pulls a sled with waxed wood acceleration is independent of mass.)
runners on wet snow (mush!). The dogs have 9. Show that the acceleration of any object down an
average masses of 19.0 kg, and the loaded sled incline where friction behaves simply (that is, where
with its rider has a mass of 210 kg. (a) Calculate the ) is Note that
magnitude of the acceleration starting from rest if the acceleration is independent of mass and
each dog exerts an average force of 185 N reduces to the expression found in the previous
backward on the snow. (b) What is the magnitude of problem when friction becomes negligibly small
the acceleration once the sled starts to move? (c)
For both situations, calculate the magnitude of the 10. Calculate the deceleration of a snow boarder
force in the coupling between the dogs and the going up a , slope assuming the coefficient of
sled. friction for waxed wood on wet snow. The result of
Exercise 5.9may be useful, but be careful to
consider the fact that the snow boarder is going
uphill. Explicitly show how you follow the steps in
Problem-Solving Strategies.
11. (a) Calculate the acceleration of a skier heading
down a slope, assuming the coefficient of
friction for waxed wood on wet snow. (b) Find the
angle of the slope down which this skier could
coast at a constant velocity. You can neglect air
resistance in both parts, and you will find the
result ofExercise 5.9to be useful. Explicitly show
how you follow the steps in theProblem-Solving
Strategies.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 241
5 • Problems & Exercises 223
12. If an object is to rest on an incline without 17. Consider the 52.0-kg mountain climber inFigure
slipping, then friction must equal the component 5.20. (a) Find the tension in the rope and the force
of the weight of the object parallel to the incline. that the mountain climber must exert with her feet
This requires greater and greater friction for on the vertical rock face to remain stationary.
steeper slopes. Show that the maximum angle of Assume that the force is exerted parallel to her
an incline above the horizontal for which an object legs. Also, assume negligible force exerted by her
will not slide down is . You may use arms. (b) What is the minimum coefficient of
the result of the previous problem. Assume that friction between her shoes and the cliff?
and that static friction has reached its
maximum value.
13. Calculate the maximum deceleration of a car that
is heading down a slope (one that makes an
angle of with the horizontal) under the following
road conditions. You may assume that the weight
of the car is evenly distributed on all four tires and
that the coefficient of static friction is
involved—that is, the tires are not allowed to slip
during the deceleration. (Ignore rolling.) Calculate
for a car: (a) On dry concrete. (b) On wet concrete.
(c) On ice, assuming that , the same as
for shoes on ice.
14. Calculate the maximum acceleration of a car that
is heading up a slope (one that makes an angle
of with the horizontal) under the following road
conditions. Assume that only half the weight of the
car is supported by the two drive wheels and that
FIGURE5.20Part of the climber’s weight is supported by
the coefficient of static friction is involved—that is,
her rope and part by friction between her feet and the rock
the tires are not allowed to slip during the face.
acceleration. (Ignore rolling.) (a) On dry concrete.
18. A contestant in a winter sporting event pushes a
(b) On wet concrete. (c) On ice, assuming that
45.0-kg block of ice across a frozen lake as shown
, the same as for shoes on ice.
inFigure 5.21(a). (a) Calculate the minimum force
15. RepeatExercise 5.14for a car with four-wheel
he must exert to get the block moving. (b) What
drive.
is the magnitude of its acceleration once it starts
16. A freight train consists of two to move, if that force is maintained?
engines and 45 cars with average masses of
. (a) What force must each engine
exert backward on the track to accelerate the train
at a rate of if the force of
friction is , assuming the engines
exert identical forces? This is not a large frictional
force for such a massive system. Rolling friction
for trains is small, and consequently trains are
very energy-efficient transportation systems. (b)
What is the magnitude of the force in the coupling
between the 37th and 38th cars (this is the force
each exerts on the other), assuming all cars have
the same mass and that friction is evenly
distributed among all of the cars and engines?
PAGE: 242
224 5 • Problems & Exercises
19. RepeatExercise 5.18with the contestant pulling 23. To maintain a constant speed, the force provided
the block of ice with a rope over his shoulder at by a car’s engine must equal the drag force plus
the same angle above the horizontal as shown in the force of friction of the road (the rolling
Figure 5.21(b). resistance). (a) What are the magnitudes of drag
forces at 70 km/h and 100 km/h for a Toyota
Camry? (Drag area is ) (b) What is the
magnitude of drag force at 70 km/h and 100 km/h
for a Hummer H2? (Drag area is ) Assume
all values are accurate to three significant digits.
24. By what factor does the drag force on a car
increase as it goes from 65 to 110 km/h?
25. Calculate the speed a spherical rain drop would
achieve falling from 5.00 km (a) in the absence of
air drag (b) with air drag. Take the size across of
the drop to be 4 mm, the density to be
, and the cross-section area
facing the fluid to be .
26. Using Stokes’ law, verify that the units for viscosity
are kilograms per meter per second.
27. Find the terminal velocity of a spherical bacterium
(diameter ) falling in water. You will first
need to note that the drag force is equal to the
weight at terminal velocity. Take the density of the
FIGURE5.21Which method of sliding a block of ice requires
bacterium to be .
less force—(a) pushing or (b) pulling at the same angle above
the horizontal? 28. Stokes’ law describes sedimentation of particles
in liquids and can be used to measure viscosity.
Particles in liquids achieve terminal velocity
5.2Drag Forces
quickly. One can measure the time it takes for a
20. The terminal velocity of a person falling in air particle to fall a certain distance and then use
depends upon the weight and the area of the Stokes’ law to calculate the viscosity of the liquid.
person facing the fluid. Find the terminal velocity Suppose a steel ball bearing (density
(in meters per second and kilometers per hour) of , diameter ) is dropped in
an 80.0-kg skydiver falling in a headfirst position a container of motor oil. It takes 12 s to fall a
with a cross-section area facing the fluid of distance of 0.60 m. Calculate the viscosity of the
. oil.
21. A 60-kg and a 90-kg skydiver jump from an
airplane at an altitude of 6000 m, both falling in a 5.3Elasticity: Stress and Strain
headfirst position. Make some assumption on their
29. During a circus act, one performer swings upside
frontal areas and calculate their terminal
down hanging from a trapeze holding another, also
velocities. How long will it take for each skydiver
upside-down, performer by the legs. If the upward
to reach the ground (assuming the time to reach
force on the lower performer is three times her
terminal velocity is small)? Assume all values are
weight, how much do the bones (the femurs) in
accurate to three significant digits.
her upper legs stretch? You may assume each is
22. A 560-g squirrel with a cross-section area facing
equivalent to a uniform rod 35.0 cm long and 1.80
the fluid of falls from a 5.0-m tree to the
cm in radius. Her mass is 60.0 kg.
ground. Estimate its terminal velocity. (Use a drag
30. During a wrestling match, a 150 kg wrestler briefly
coefficient for a horizontal skydiver.) What will be
stands on one hand during a maneuver designed
the velocity of a 56-kg person hitting the ground,
to perplex her adversary. By how much does the
assuming no drag contribution in such a short
upper arm bone shorten in length? The bone can
distance?
be represented by a uniform rod 38.0 cm in length
and 2.10 cm in radius.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 243
5 • Problems & Exercises 225
31. (a) The “lead” in pencils is a graphite composition 40. To consider the effect of wires hung on poles, we
with a Young’s modulus of about . take data fromExample 4.8, in which tensions in
Calculate the change in length of the lead in an wires supporting a traffic light were calculated.
automatic pencil if you tap it straight into the The left wire made an angle below the
pencil with a force of 4.0 N. The lead is 0.50 mm in horizontal with the top of its pole and carried a
diameter and 60 mm long. (b) Is the answer tension of 108 N. The 12.0 m tall hollow
reasonable? That is, does it seem to be consistent aluminum pole is equivalent in stiffness to a 4.50
with what you have observed when using pencils? cm diameter solid cylinder. (a) How far is it bent to
32. TV broadcast antennas are the tallest artificial the side? (b) By how much is it compressed?
structures on Earth. In 1987, a 72.0-kg physicist 41. A farmer making grape juice fills a glass bottle to
placed himself and 400 kg of equipment at the top the brim and caps it tightly. The juice expands
of one 610-m high antenna to perform gravity more than the glass when it warms up, in such a
experiments. By how much was the antenna way that the volume increases by 0.2% (that is,
compressed, if we consider it to be equivalent to a ) relative to the space
steel cylinder 0.150 m in radius? available. Calculate the magnitude of the normal
33. (a) By how much does a 65.0-kg mountain climber force exerted by the juice per square centimeter if
stretch her 0.800-cm diameter nylon rope when its bulk modulus is , assuming the
they hang 35.0 m below a rock outcropping? (b) bottle does not break. In view of your answer, do
Does the answer seem to be consistent with what you think the bottle will survive?
you have observed for nylon ropes? Would it make 42. (a) When water freezes, its volume increases by
sense if the rope were actually a bungee cord? 9.05% (that is, ). What
34. A 20.0-m tall hollow aluminum flagpole is force per unit area is water capable of exerting on
equivalent in stiffness to a solid cylinder 4.00 cm a container when it freezes? (It is acceptable to
in diameter. A strong wind bends the pole much as use the bulk modulus of water in this problem.) (b)
a horizontal force of 900 N exerted at the top Is it surprising that such forces can fracture
would. How far to the side does the top of the pole engine blocks, boulders, and the like?
flex? 43. This problem returns to the tightrope walker
35. As an oil well is drilled, each new section of drill studied inExample 4.6, who created a tension of
pipe supports its own weight and that of the pipe in a wire making an angle
and drill bit beneath it. Calculate the stretch in a below the horizontal with each supporting pole.
new 6.00 m length of steel pipe that supports Calculate how much this tension stretches the
3.00 km of pipe having a mass of 20.0 kg/m and a steel wire if it was originally 15 m long and 0.50
100-kg drill bit. The pipe is equivalent in stiffness cm in diameter.
to a solid cylinder 5.00 cm in diameter.
36. Calculate the force a piano tuner applies to stretch
a steel piano wire 8.00 mm, if the wire is originally
0.850 mm in diameter and 1.35 m long.
37. A vertebra is subjected to a shearing force of 500
N. Find the shear deformation, taking the vertebra
to be a cylinder 3.00 cm high and 4.00 cm in
diameter.
38. A disk between vertebrae in the spine is subjected
to a shearing force of 600 N. Find its shear
deformation, taking it to have the shear modulus
of . The disk is equivalent to a solid
cylinder 0.700 cm high and 4.00 cm in diameter.
39. When using a pencil eraser, you exert a vertical
force of 6.00 N at a distance of 2.00 cm from the
hardwood-eraser joint. The pencil is 6.00 mm in
diameter and is held at an angle of to the
horizontal. (a) By how much does the wood flex
perpendicular to its length? (b) How much is it
compressed lengthwise?
PAGE: 244
226 5 • Problems & Exercises
44. The pole inFigure 5.22is at a bend in a 45. Critical ThinkingTwo spherical beads of the same
power line and is therefore subjected to more mass fall at a constant speed due to a drag force.
shear force than poles in straight parts of the line. Bead A takes twice as long to fall the same
The tension in each line is , at the distance as bead B. (a) Which of these beads has
angles shown. The pole is 15.0 m tall, has an 18.0 the larger radius? (b) Based on experimental data,
cm diameter, and can be considered to have half an equation that fits the data is suggested for
the stiffness of hardwood. (a) Calculate the radius of a bead,r, which may not be correct:
compression of the pole. (b) Find how much it , whereKis a constant with
bends and in what direction. (c) Find the tension in appropriate units andtis the time it takes for a
a guy wire used to keep the pole straight if it is bead to reach a determined distance. Is this
attached to the top of the pole at an angle of equation consistent with your answer from part a?
with the vertical. (Clearly, the guy wire must be in Explain why or why not. Does this equation make
the opposite direction of the bend.) sense? Explain why or why not. (c) Beads of
different radii are selected and the time it takes to
fall a set distance is recorded. Graph the radius of
these beads as a function of the time it takes to
fall a determined distance.
FIGURE5.22This telephone pole is at a bend in a power
line. A guy wire is attached to the top of the pole at an angle
of with the vertical.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 245
CHAPTER 6
Uniform Circular Motion and Gravitation
FIGURE6.1This Australian Grand Prix Formula 1 race car moves in a circular path as it makes the turn. Its wheels also spin rapidly—the
latter completing many revolutions, the former only part of one (a circular arc). The same physical principles are involved in each. (credit:
Richard Munckton)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
6.1Rotation Angle and Angular Velocity
6.2Centripetal Acceleration
6.3Centripetal Force
6.4Fictitious Forces and Non-inertial Frames: The Coriolis Force
6.5Newton’s Universal Law of Gravitation
6.6Satellites and Kepler’s Laws: An Argument for Simplicity
INTRODUCTION TO UNIFORM CIRCULAR MOTION AND GRAVITATION Many motions, such as the arc of a bird’s
flight or Earth’s path around the Sun, are curved. Recall that Newton’s first law tells us that motion is along a straight
line at constant speed unless there is a net external force. We will therefore study not only motion along curves, but
also the forces that cause it, including gravitational forces. In some ways, this chapter is a continuation ofDynamics:
Newton's Laws of Motionas we study more applications of Newton’s laws of motion.
This chapter deals with the simplest form of curved motion,uniform circular motion, motion in a circular path at
constant speed. Studying this topic illustrates most concepts associated with rotational motion and leads to the
study of many new topics we group under the namerotation. Purerotational motionoccurs when points in an object
move in circular paths centered on one point. Puretranslational motionis motion with no rotation. Some motion
combines both types, such as a rotating hockey puck moving along ice.
PAGE: 246
228 6 • Uniform Circular Motion and Gravitation
6.1 Rotation Angle and Angular Velocity
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define arc length, rotation angle, radius of curvature and angular velocity.
• Calculate the angular velocity of a car wheel spin.
InKinematics, we studied motion along a straight line and introduced such concepts as displacement, velocity, and
acceleration.Two-Dimensional Kinematicsdealt with motion in two dimensions. Projectile motion is a special case
of two-dimensional kinematics in which the object is projected into the air, while being subject to the gravitational
force, and lands a distance away. In this chapter, we consider situations where the object does not land but moves
in a curve. We begin the study of uniform circular motion by defining two angular quantities needed to describe
rotational motion.
Rotation Angle
When objects rotate about some axis—for example, when the CD (compact disc) inFigure 6.2rotates about its
center—each point in the object follows a circular arc. Consider a line from the center of the CD to its edge. Eachpit
used to record sound along this line moves through the same angle in the same amount of time. The rotation angle
is the amount of rotation and is analogous to linear distance. We define therotation angle to be the ratio of the
arc length to the radius of curvature:
6.1
FIGURE6.2All points on a CD travel in circular arcs. The pits along a line from the center to the edge all move through the same angle
in a time .
FIGURE6.3The radius of a circle is rotated through an angle . The arc length is described on the circumference.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 247
6.1 • Rotation Angle and Angular Velocity 229
Thearc length is the distance traveled along a circular path as shown inFigure 6.3Note that is theradius of
curvatureof the circular path.
We know that for one complete revolution, the arc length is the circumference of a circle of radius . The
circumference of a circle is . Thus for one complete revolution the rotation angle is
6.2
This result is the basis for defining the units used to measure rotation angles, to beradians(rad), defined so that
6.3
A comparison of some useful angles expressed in both degrees and radians is shown inTable 6.1.
Degree Measures Radian Measure
TABLE6.1Comparison of Angular Units
FIGURE6.4Points 1 and 2 rotate through the same angle ( ), but point 2 moves through a greater arc length because it is at a
greater distance from the center of rotation .
If rad, then the CD has made one complete revolution, and every point on the CD is back at its original
position. Because there are in a circle or one revolution, the relationship between radians and degrees is thus
6.4
so that
6.5
PAGE: 248
230 6 • Uniform Circular Motion and Gravitation
Angular Velocity
How fast is an object rotating? We defineangular velocity as the rate of change of an angle. In symbols, this is
6.6
where an angular rotation takes place in a time . The greater the rotation angle in a given amount of time, the
greater the angular velocity. The units for angular velocity are radians per second (rad/s).
Angular velocity is analogous to linear velocity . To get the precise relationship between angular and linear
velocity, we again consider a pit on the rotating CD. This pit moves an arc length in a time , and so it has a
linear velocity
6.7
From we see that . Substituting this into the expression for gives
6.8
We write this relationship in two different ways and gain two different insights:
6.9
The first relationship in states that the linear velocity is proportional to the distance from the
center of rotation, thus, it is largest for a point on the rim (largest ), as you might expect. We can also call this linear
speed of a point on the rim thetangential speed. The second relationship in can be illustrated
by considering the tire of a moving car. Note that the speed of a point on the rim of the tire is the same as the speed
of the car. SeeFigure 6.5. So the faster the car moves, the faster the tire spins—large means a large , because
. Similarly, a larger-radius tire rotating at the same angular velocity ( ) will produce a greater linear speed ( )
for the car.
FIGURE6.5A car moving at a velocity to the right has a tire rotating with an angular velocity .The speed of the tread of the tire relative
to the axle is , the same as if the car were jacked up. Thus the car moves forward at linear velocity , where is the tire radius. A
larger angular velocity for the tire means a greater velocity for the car.
EXAMPLE 6.1
How Fast Does a Car Tire Spin?
Calculate the angular velocity of a 0.300 m radius car tire when the car travels at (about ). See
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 249
6.1 • Rotation Angle and Angular Velocity 231
Figure 6.5.
Strategy
Because the linear speed of the tire rim is the same as the speed of the car, we have The radius of the
tire is given to be Knowing and , we can use the second relationship in to calculate
the angular velocity.
Solution
To calculate the angular velocity, we will use the following relationship:
6.10
Substituting the knowns,
6.11
Discussion
When we cancel units in the above calculation, we get 50.0/s. But the angular velocity must have units of rad/s.
Because radians are actually unitless (radians are defined as a ratio of distance), we can simply insert them into the
answer for the angular velocity. Also note that if an earth mover with much larger tires, say 1.20 m in radius, were
moving at the same speed of 15.0 m/s, its tires would rotate more slowly. They would have an angular velocity
6.12
Both and have directions (hence they are angular and linearvelocities, respectively). Angular velocity has only
two directions with respect to the axis of rotation—it is either clockwise or counterclockwise. Linear velocity is
tangent to the path, as illustrated inFigure 6.6.
Take-Home Experiment
Tie an object to the end of a string and swing it around in a horizontal circle above your head (swing at your
wrist). Maintain uniform speed as the object swings and measure the angular velocity of the motion. What is the
approximate speed of the object? Identify a point close to your hand and take appropriate measurements to
calculate the linear speed at this point. Identify other circular motions and measure their angular velocities.
FIGURE6.6As an object moves in a circle, here a fly on the edge of an old-fashioned vinyl record, its instantaneous velocity is always
tangent to the circle. The direction of the angular velocity is clockwise in this case.
PAGE: 250
232 6 • Uniform Circular Motion and Gravitation
Ladybug Revolution
Join the ladybug in an exploration of rotational motion. Rotate the merry-go-round to change its angle, or
choose a constant angular velocity or angular acceleration. Explore how circular motion relates to the bug's x,y
position, velocity, and acceleration using vectors or graphs.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/l/28ladybugrevolutionrotation).
6.2 Centripetal Acceleration
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Establish the expression for centripetal acceleration.
• Explain the centrifuge.
We know from kinematics that acceleration is a change in velocity, either in its magnitude or in its direction, or both.
In uniform circular motion, the direction of the velocity changes constantly, so there is always an associated
acceleration, even though the magnitude of the velocity might be constant. You experience this acceleration
yourself when you turn a corner in your car. (If you hold the wheel steady during a turn and move at constant speed,
you are in uniform circular motion.) What you notice is a sideways acceleration because you and the car are
changing direction. The sharper the curve and the greater your speed, the more noticeable this acceleration will
become. In this section we examine the direction and magnitude of that acceleration.
Figure 6.7shows an object moving in a circular path at constant speed. The direction of the instantaneous velocity is
shown at two points along the path. Acceleration is in the direction of the change in velocity, which points directly
toward the center of rotation (the center of the circular path). This pointing is shown with the vector diagram in the
figure. We call the acceleration of an object moving in uniform circular motion (resulting from a net external force)
thecentripetal acceleration( ); centripetal means “toward the center” or “center seeking.”
FIGURE6.7The directions of the velocity of an object at two different points are shown, and the change in velocity is seen to point
directly toward the center of curvature. (See small inset.) Because , the acceleration is also toward the center; is called
centripetal acceleration. (Because is very small, the arc length is equal to the chord length for small time differences.)
The direction of centripetal acceleration is toward the center of curvature, but what is its magnitude? Note that the
triangle formed by the velocity vectors and the one formed by the radii and are similar. Both the triangles ABC
and PQR are isosceles triangles (two equal sides). The two equal sides of the velocity vector triangle are the speeds
. Using the properties of two similar triangles, we obtain
6.13
Acceleration is , and so we first solve this expression for :
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 251
6.2 • Centripetal Acceleration 233
6.14
Then we divide this by , yielding
6.15
Finally, noting that and that , the linear or tangential speed, we see that the magnitude of the
centripetal acceleration is
6.16
which is the acceleration of an object in a circle of radius at a speed . So, centripetal acceleration is greater at
high speeds and in sharp curves (smaller radius), as you have noticed when driving a car. But it is a bit surprising
that is proportional to speed squared, implying, for example, that it is four times as hard to take a curve at 100
km/h than at 50 km/h. A sharp corner has a small radius, so that is greater for tighter turns, as you have probably
noticed.
It is also useful to express in terms of angular velocity. Substituting into the above expression, we find
. We can express the magnitude of centripetal acceleration using either of two equations:
6.17
Recall that the direction of is toward the center. You may use whichever expression is more convenient, as
illustrated in examples below.
Acentrifuge(seeFigure 6.8b) is a rotating device used to separate specimens of different densities. High
centripetal acceleration significantly decreases the time it takes for separation to occur, and makes separation
possible with small samples. Centrifuges are used in a variety of applications in science and medicine, including the
separation of single cell suspensions such as bacteria, viruses, and blood cells from a liquid medium and the
separation of macromolecules, such as DNA and protein, from a solution. Centrifuges are often rated in terms of
their centripetal acceleration relative to acceleration due to gravity ; maximum centripetal acceleration of several
hundred thousand is possible in a vacuum. Human centrifuges, extremely large centrifuges, have been used to test
the tolerance of astronauts to the effects of accelerations larger than that of Earth’s gravity.
EXAMPLE 6.2
How Does the Centripetal Acceleration of a Car Around a Curve Compare with That Due to
Gravity?
What is the magnitude of the centripetal acceleration of a car following a curve of radius 500 m at a speed of 25.0
m/s (about 90 km/h)? Compare the acceleration with that due to gravity for this fairly gentle curve taken at highway
speed. SeeFigure 6.8(a).
Strategy
Because and are given, the first expression in is the most convenient to use.
Solution
Entering the given values of and into the first expression for gives
6.18
Discussion
To compare this with the acceleration due to gravity , we take the ratio of
PAGE: 252
234 6 • Uniform Circular Motion and Gravitation
. Thus, and is noticeable especially if you were not wearing a
seat belt.
FIGURE6.8(a) The car following a circular path at constant speed is accelerated perpendicular to its velocity, as shown. The magnitude of
this centripetal acceleration is found inExample 6.2. (b) A particle of mass in a centrifuge is rotating at constant angular velocity . It must
be accelerated perpendicular to its velocity or it would continue in a straight line. The magnitude of the necessary acceleration is found in
Example 6.3.
EXAMPLE 6.3
How Big Is the Centripetal Acceleration in an Ultracentrifuge?
Calculate the centripetal acceleration of a point 7.50 cm from the axis of anultracentrifugespinning at
Determine the ratio of this acceleration to that due to gravity. SeeFigure 6.8(b).
Strategy
The term rev/min stands for revolutions per minute. By converting this to radians per second, we obtain the angular
velocity . Because is given, we can use the second expression in the equation to calculate
the centripetal acceleration.
Solution
To convert to radians per second, we use the facts that one revolution is and one minute
is 60.0 s. Thus,
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 253
6.3 • Centripetal Force 235
6.19
Now the centripetal acceleration is given by the second expression in as
6.20
Converting 7.50 cm to meters and substituting known values gives
6.21
Note that the unitless radians are discarded in order to get the correct units for centripetal acceleration. Taking the
ratio of to yields
6.22
Discussion
This last result means that the centripetal acceleration is 472,000 times as strong as . It is no wonder that such
high centrifuges are called ultracentrifuges. The extremely large accelerations involved greatly decrease the time
needed to cause the sedimentation of blood cells or other materials.
Of course, a net external force is needed to cause any acceleration, just as Newton proposed in his second law of
motion. So a net external force is needed to cause a centripetal acceleration. InCentripetal Force, we will consider
the forces involved in circular motion.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Ladybug Motion 2D
Learn about position, velocity and acceleration vectors. Move the ladybug by setting the position, velocity or
acceleration, and see how the vectors change. Choose linear, circular or elliptical motion, and record and playback
the motion to analyze the behavior.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/l/28ladybugmotion).
6.3 Centripetal Force
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Calculate coefficient of friction on a car tire.
• Calculate ideal speed and angle of a car on a turn.
Any force or combination of forces can cause a centripetal or radial acceleration. Just a few examples are the
tension in the rope on a tether ball, the force of Earth’s gravity on the Moon, friction between roller skates and a rink
floor, a banked roadway’s force on a car, and forces on the tube of a spinning centrifuge.
Any net force causing uniform circular motion is called acentripetal force. The direction of a centripetal force is
toward the center of curvature, the same as the direction of centripetal acceleration. According to Newton’s second
law of motion, net force is mass times acceleration: net . For uniform circular motion, the acceleration is the
centripetal acceleration— . Thus, the magnitude of centripetal force is
6.23
By using the expressions for centripetal acceleration from , we get two expressions for the
centripetal force in terms of mass, velocity, angular velocity, and radius of curvature:
PAGE: 254
236 6 • Uniform Circular Motion and Gravitation
6.24
You may use whichever expression for centripetal force is more convenient. Centripetal force is always
perpendicular to the path and pointing to the center of curvature, because is perpendicular to the velocity and
pointing to the center of curvature.
Note that if you solve the first expression for , you get
6.25
This implies that for a given mass and velocity, a large centripetal force causes a small radius of curvature—that is, a
tight curve.
FIGURE6.9The frictional force supplies the centripetal force and is numerically equal to it. Centripetal force is perpendicular to velocity
and causes uniform circular motion. The larger the , the smaller the radius of curvature and the sharper the curve. The second curve
has the same , but a larger produces a smaller .
EXAMPLE 6.4
What Coefficient of Friction Do Car Tires Need on a Flat Curve?
(a) Calculate the centripetal force exerted on a 900 kg car that negotiates a 500 m radius curve at 25.0 m/s.
(b) Assuming an unbanked curve, find the minimum static coefficient of friction, between the tires and the road,
static friction being the reason that keeps the car from slipping (seeFigure 6.10).
Strategy and Solution for (a)
We know that . Thus,
6.26
Strategy for (b)
Figure 6.10shows the forces acting on the car on an unbanked (level ground) curve. Friction is to the left, keeping
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 255
6.3 • Centripetal Force 237
the car from slipping, and because it is the only horizontal force acting on the car, the friction is the centripetal force
in this case. We know that the maximum static friction (at which the tires roll but do not slip) is , where is the
static coefficient of friction and N is the normal force. The normal force equals the car’s weight on level ground, so
that . Thus the centripetal force in this situation is
6.27
Now we have a relationship between centripetal force and the coefficient of friction. Using the first expression for
from the equation
6.28
6.29
We solve this for , noting that mass cancels, and obtain
6.30
Solution for (b)
Substituting the knowns,
6.31
(Because coefficients of friction are approximate, the answer is given to only two digits.)
Discussion
We could also solve part (a) using the first expression in because and are given. The
coefficient of friction found in part (b) is much smaller than is typically found between tires and roads. The car will
still negotiate the curve if the coefficient is greater than 0.13, because static friction is a responsive force, being able
to assume a value less than but no more than . A higher coefficient would also allow the car to negotiate the
curve at a higher speed, but if the coefficient of friction is less, the safe speed would be less than 25 m/s. Note that
mass cancels, implying that in this example, it does not matter how heavily loaded the car is to negotiate the turn.
Mass cancels because friction is assumed proportional to the normal force, which in turn is proportional to mass. If
the surface of the road were banked, the normal force would be less as will be discussed below.
PAGE: 256
238 6 • Uniform Circular Motion and Gravitation
FIGURE6.10This car on level ground is moving away and turning to the left. The centripetal force causing the car to turn in a circular path
is due to friction between the tires and the road. A minimum coefficient of friction is needed, or the car will move in a larger-radius curve
and leave the roadway.
Let us now considerbanked curves, where the slope of the road helps you negotiate the curve. SeeFigure 6.11. The
greater the angle , the faster you can take the curve. Race tracks for bikes as well as cars, for example, often have
steeply banked curves. In an “ideally banked curve,” the angle is such that you can negotiate the curve at a certain
speed without the aid of friction between the tires and the road. We will derive an expression for for an ideally
banked curve and consider an example related to it.
Forideal banking, the net external force equals the horizontal centripetal force in the absence of friction. The
components of the normal force N in the horizontal and vertical directions must equal the centripetal force and the
weight of the car, respectively. In cases in which forces are not parallel, it is most convenient to consider
components along perpendicular axes—in this case, the vertical and horizontal directions.
Figure 6.11shows a free body diagram for a car on a frictionless banked curve. If the angle is ideal for the speed
and radius, then the net external force will equal the necessary centripetal force. The only two external forces acting
on the car are its weight and the normal force of the road . (A frictionless surface can only exert a force
perpendicular to the surface—that is, a normal force.) These two forces must add to give a net external force that is
horizontal toward the center of curvature and has magnitude . Because this is the crucial force and it is
horizontal, we use a coordinate system with vertical and horizontal axes. Only the normal force has a horizontal
component, and so this must equal the centripetal force—that is,
6.32
Because the car does not leave the surface of the road, the net vertical force must be zero, meaning that the vertical
components of the two external forces must be equal in magnitude and opposite in direction. From the figure, we
see that the vertical component of the normal force is , and the only other vertical force is the car’s weight.
These must be equal in magnitude; thus,
6.33
Now we can combine the last two equations to eliminate and get an expression for , as desired. Solving the
second equation for , and substituting this into the first yields
6.34
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 257
6.3 • Centripetal Force 239
6.35
Taking the inverse tangent gives
6.36
This expression can be understood by considering how depends on and . A large will be obtained for a large
and a small . That is, roads must be steeply banked for high speeds and sharp curves. Friction helps, because it
allows you to take the curve at greater or lower speed than if the curve is frictionless. Note that does not depend
on the mass of the vehicle.
FIGURE6.11The car on this banked curve is moving away and turning to the left.
EXAMPLE 6.5
What Is the Ideal Speed to Take a Steeply Banked Tight Curve?
Curves on some test tracks and race courses, such as the Daytona International Speedway in Florida, are very
steeply banked. This banking, with the aid of tire friction and very stable car configurations, allows the curves to be
taken at very high speed. To illustrate, calculate the speed at which a 100 m radius curve banked at 65.0° should be
driven if the road is frictionless.
Strategy
We first note that all terms in the expression for the ideal angle of a banked curve except for speed are known; thus,
we need only rearrange it so that speed appears on the left-hand side and then substitute known quantities.
Solution
Starting with
6.37
we get
6.38
Noting that tan 65.0º = 2.14, we obtain
6.39
PAGE: 258
240 6 • Uniform Circular Motion and Gravitation
Discussion
This is just about 165 km/h, consistent with a very steeply banked and rather sharp curve. Tire friction enables a
vehicle to take the curve at significantly higher speeds.
Calculations similar to those in the preceding examples can be performed for a host of interesting situations in
which centripetal force is involved—a number of these are presented in this chapter’s Problems and Exercises.
Take-Home Experiment
Ask a friend or relative to swing a golf club or a tennis racquet. Take appropriate measurements to estimate the
centripetal acceleration of the end of the club or racquet. You may choose to do this in slow motion.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Gravity and Orbits
Move the sun, earth, moon and space station to see how it affects their gravitational forces and orbital paths.
Visualize the sizes and distances between different heavenly bodies, and turn off gravity to see what would happen
without it!
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/6-3-centripetal-force)
6.4 Fictitious Forces and Non-inertial Frames: The Coriolis Force
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Discuss the inertial frame of reference.
• Discuss the non-inertial frame of reference.
• Describe the effects of the Coriolis force.
What do taking off in a jet airplane, turning a corner in a car, riding a merry-go-round, and the circular motion of a
tropical cyclone have in common? Each exhibits fictitious forces—unreal forces that arise from motion and may
seemreal, because the observer’s frame of reference is accelerating or rotating.
When taking off in a jet, most people would agree it feels as if you are being pushed back into the seat as the
airplane accelerates down the runway. Yet a physicist would say thatyoutend to remain stationary while theseat
pushes forward on you, and there is no real force backward on you. An even more common experience occurs when
you make a tight curve in your car—say, to the right. You feel as if you are thrown (that is,forced) toward the left
relative to the car. Again, a physicist would say thatyouare going in a straight line but thecarmoves to the right, and
there is no real force on you to the left. Recall Newton’s first law.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 259
6.4 • Fictitious Forces and Non-inertial Frames: The Coriolis Force 241
FIGURE6.12(a) The car driver feels herself forced to the left relative to the car when she makes a right turn. This is a fictitious force arising
from the use of the car as a frame of reference. (b) In the Earth’s frame of reference, the driver moves in a straight line, obeying Newton’s
first law, and the car moves to the right. There is no real force to the left on the driver relative to Earth. There is a real force to the right on
the car to make it turn.
We can reconcile these points of view by examining the frames of reference used. Let us concentrate on people in a
car. Passengers instinctively use the car as a frame of reference, while a physicist uses Earth. The physicist chooses
Earth because it is very nearly an inertial frame of reference—one in which all forces are real (that is, in which all
forces have an identifiable physical origin). In such a frame of reference, Newton’s laws of motion take the form
given inDynamics: Newton's Laws of MotionThe car is anon-inertial frame of referencebecause it is accelerated
to the side. The force to the left sensed by car passengers is afictitious forcehaving no physical origin. There is
nothing real pushing them left—the car, as well as the driver, is actually accelerating to the right.
Let us now take a mental ride on a merry-go-round—specifically, a rapidly rotating playground merry-go-round. You
take the merry-go-round to be your frame of reference because you rotate together. In that non-inertial frame, you
feel a fictitious force, namedcentrifugal force(not to be confused with centripetal force), trying to throw you off.
You must hang on tightly to counteract the centrifugal force. In Earth’s frame of reference, there is no force trying to
throw you off. Rather you must hang on to make yourself go in a circle because otherwise you would go in a straight
line, right off the merry-go-round.
FIGURE6.13(a) A rider on a merry-go-round feels as if he is being thrown off. This fictitious force is called the centrifugal force—it explains
the rider’s motion in the rotating frame of reference. (b) In an inertial frame of reference and according to Newton’s laws, it is his inertia that
carries him off and not a real force (the unshaded rider has and heads in a straight line). A real force, , is needed to
cause a circular path.
This inertial effect, carrying you away from the center of rotation if there is no centripetal force to cause circular
motion, is put to good use in centrifuges (seeFigure 6.14). A centrifuge spins a sample very rapidly, as mentioned
PAGE: 260
242 6 • Uniform Circular Motion and Gravitation
earlier in this chapter. Viewed from the rotating frame of reference, the fictitious centrifugal force throws particles
outward, hastening their sedimentation. The greater the angular velocity, the greater the centrifugal force. But what
really happens is that the inertia of the particles carries them along a line tangent to the circle while the test tube is
forced in a circular path by a centripetal force.
FIGURE6.14Centrifuges use inertia to perform their task. Particles in the fluid sediment come out because their inertia carries them away
from the center of rotation. The large angular velocity of the centrifuge quickens the sedimentation. Ultimately, the particles will come into
contact with the test tube walls, which will then supply the centripetal force needed to make them move in a circle of constant radius.
Let us now consider what happens if something moves in a frame of reference that rotates. For example, what if you
slide a ball directly away from the center of the merry-go-round, as shown inFigure 6.15? The ball follows a straight
path relative to Earth (assuming negligible friction) and a path curved to the right on the merry-go-round’s surface. A
person standing next to the merry-go-round sees the ball moving straight and the merry-go-round rotating
underneath it. In the merry-go-round’s frame of reference, we explain the apparent curve to the right by using a
fictitious force, called theCoriolis force, that causes the ball to curve to the right. The fictitious Coriolis force can be
used by anyone in that frame of reference to explain why objects follow curved paths and allows us to apply
Newton’s Laws in non-inertial frames of reference.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 261
6.4 • Fictitious Forces and Non-inertial Frames: The Coriolis Force 243
FIGURE6.15Looking down on the counterclockwise rotation of a merry-go-round, we see that a ball slid straight toward the edge follows a
path curved to the right. The person slides the ball toward point B, starting at point A. Both points rotate to the shaded positions (A’ and B’)
shown in the time that the ball follows the curved path in the rotating frame and a straight path in Earth’s frame.
Up until now, we have considered Earth to be an inertial frame of reference with little or no worry about effects due
to its rotation. Yet such effectsdoexist—in the rotation of weather systems, for example. Most consequences of
Earth’s rotation can be qualitatively understood by analogy with the merry-go-round. Viewed from above the North
Pole, Earth rotates counterclockwise, as does the merry-go-round inFigure 6.15. As on the merry-go-round, any
motion in Earth’s northern hemisphere experiences a Coriolis force to the right. Just the opposite occurs in the
southern hemisphere; there, the force is to the left. Because Earth’s angular velocity is small, the Coriolis force is
usually negligible, but for large-scale motions, such as wind patterns, it has substantial effects.
The Coriolis force causes hurricanes in the northern hemisphere to rotate in the counterclockwise direction, while
the tropical cyclones (what hurricanes are called below the equator) in the southern hemisphere rotate in the
clockwise direction. The terms hurricane, typhoon, and tropical storm are regionally-specific names for tropical
cyclones, storm systems characterized by low pressure centers, strong winds, and heavy rains.Figure 6.16helps
show how these rotations take place. Air flows toward any region of low pressure, and tropical cyclones contain
particularly low pressures. Thus winds flow toward the center of a tropical cyclone or a low-pressure weather
system at the surface. In the northern hemisphere, these inward winds are deflected to the right, as shown in the
figure, producing a counterclockwise circulation at the surface for low-pressure zones of any type. Low pressure at
the surface is associated with rising air, which also produces cooling and cloud formation, making low-pressure
patterns quite visible from space. Conversely, wind circulation around high-pressure zones is clockwise in the
northern hemisphere but is less visible because high pressure is associated with sinking air, producing clear skies.
The rotation of tropical cyclones and the path of a ball on a merry-go-round can just as well be explained by inertia
and the rotation of the system underneath. When non-inertial frames are used, fictitious forces, such as the Coriolis
force, must be invented to explain the curved path. There is no identifiable physical source for these fictitious forces.
In an inertial frame, inertia explains the path, and no force is found to be without an identifiable source. Either view
allows us to describe nature, but a view in an inertial frame is the simplest and truest, in the sense that all forces
have real origins and explanations.
PAGE: 262
244 6 • Uniform Circular Motion and Gravitation
FIGURE6.16(a) The counterclockwise rotation of this northern hemisphere hurricane is a major consequence of the Coriolis force. (credit:
NASA) (b) Without the Coriolis force, air would flow straight into a low-pressure zone, such as that found in tropical cyclones. (c) The
Coriolis force deflects the winds to the right, producing a counterclockwise rotation. (d) Wind flowing away from a high-pressure zone is
also deflected to the right, producing a clockwise rotation. (e) The opposite direction of rotation is produced by the Coriolis force in the
southern hemisphere, leading to tropical cyclones. (credit: NASA)
6.5 Newton’s Universal Law of Gravitation
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain Earth’s gravitational force.
• Describe the gravitational effect of the Moon on Earth.
• Discuss weightlessness in space.
• Examine the Cavendish experiment
What do aching feet, a falling apple, and the orbit of the Moon have in common? Each is caused by the gravitational
force. Our feet are strained by supporting our weight—the force of Earth’s gravity on us. An apple falls from a tree
because of the same force acting a few meters above Earth’s surface. And the Moon orbits Earth because gravity is
able to supply the necessary centripetal force at a distance of hundreds of millions of meters. In fact, the same force
causes planets to orbit the Sun, stars to orbit the center of the galaxy, and galaxies to cluster together. Gravity is
another example of underlying simplicity in nature. It is the weakest of the four basic forces found in nature, and in
some ways the least understood. It is a force that acts at a distance, without physical contact, and is expressed by a
formula that is valid everywhere in the universe, for masses and distances that vary from the tiny to the immense.
Sir Isaac Newton was the first scientist to precisely define the gravitational force, and to show that it could explain
both falling bodies and astronomical motions. SeeFigure 6.17. But Newton was not the first to suspect that the
same force caused both our weight and the motion of planets. His forerunner Galileo Galilei had contended that
falling bodies and planetary motions had the same cause. Some of Newton’s contemporaries, such as Robert Hooke,
Christopher Wren, and Edmund Halley, had also made some progress toward understanding gravitation. But Newton
was the first to propose an exact mathematical form and to use that form to show that the motion of heavenly
bodies should be conic sections—circles, ellipses, parabolas, and hyperbolas. This theoretical prediction was a
major triumph—it had been known for some time that moons, planets, and comets follow such paths, but no one
had been able to propose a mechanism that caused them to follow these paths and not others. Other prominent
scientists and mathematicians of the time, particularly those outside of England, were reluctant to accept Newton's
principles. It took the work of another prominent philosopher, writer, and scientist, Émilie du Châtelet, to establish
the Newtonian gravitation as the accurate and overarching law. Du Châtelet, who had earlier laid the foundation for
the understanding of conservation of energy as well as the principle that light had no mass, translated and
augmented Newton's key work. She also utilized calculus to explain gravity, which helped lead to its acceptance.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 263
6.5 • Newton’s Universal Law of Gravitation 245
FIGURE6.17According to early accounts, Newton was inspired to make the connection between falling bodies and astronomical motions
when he saw an apple fall from a tree and realized that if the gravitational force could extend above the ground to a tree, it might also reach
the Sun. The inspiration of Newton’s apple is a part of worldwide folklore and may even be based in fact. Newton’s universal law of
gravitation and his laws of motion answered very old questions about nature and gave tremendous support to the notion of underlying
simplicity and unity in nature. Like many revolutionary discoveries, it was not immediately accepted. Prominent French scientist and
philosopher Émilie du Châtelet helped establish Newton's theory in France and mainland Europe.
The gravitational force is relatively simple. It is always attractive, and it depends only on the masses involved and
the distance between them. Stated in modern language,Newton’s universal law of gravitationstates that every
particle in the universe attracts every other particle with a force along a line joining them. The force is directly
proportional to the product of their masses and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them.
FIGURE6.18Gravitational attraction is along a line joining the centers of mass of these two bodies. The magnitude of the force is the same
on each, consistent with Newton’s third law.
Misconception Alert
The magnitude of the force on each object (one has larger mass than the other) is the same, consistent with
Newton’s third law.
The bodies we are dealing with tend to be large. To simplify the situation we assume that the body acts as if its
entire mass is concentrated at one specific point called thecenter of mass(CM), which will be further explored in
Linear Momentum and Collisions. For two bodies having masses and with a distance between their centers of
mass, the equation for Newton’s universal law of gravitation is
6.40
where is the magnitude of the gravitational force and is a proportionality factor called thegravitational
constant. is a universal gravitational constant—that is, it is thought to be the same everywhere in the universe. It
has been measured experimentally to be
PAGE: 264
246 6 • Uniform Circular Motion and Gravitation
6.41
in SI units. Note that the units of are such that a force in newtons is obtained from , when considering
masses in kilograms and distance in meters. For example, two 1.000 kg masses separated by 1.000 m will
experience a gravitational attraction of . This is an extraordinarily small force. The small magnitude
of the gravitational force is consistent with everyday experience. We are unaware that even large objects like
mountains exert gravitational forces on us. In fact, our body weight is the force of attraction of theentire Earthon us
with a mass of .
Recall that the acceleration due to gravity is about on Earth. We can now determine why this is so. The
weight of an objectmgis the gravitational force between it and Earth. Substitutingmgfor in Newton’s universal
law of gravitation gives
6.42
where is the mass of the object, is the mass of Earth, and is the distance to the center of Earth (the distance
between the centers of mass of the object and Earth). SeeFigure 6.19. The mass of the object cancels, leaving an
equation for :
6.43
Substituting known values for Earth’s mass and radius (to three significant figures),
6.44
and we obtain a value for the acceleration of a falling body:
6.45
FIGURE6.19The distance between the centers of mass of Earth and an object on its surface is very nearly the same as the radius of Earth,
because Earth is so much larger than the object.
This is the expected valueand is independent of the body’s mass. Newton’s law of gravitation takes Galileo’s
observation that all masses fall with the same acceleration a step further, explaining the observation in terms of a
force that causes objects to fall—in fact, in terms of a universally existing force of attraction between masses.
Take-Home Experiment
Take a marble, a ball, and a spoon and drop them from the same height. Do they hit the floor at the same time?
If you drop a piece of paper as well, does it behave like the other objects? Explain your observations.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 265
6.5 • Newton’s Universal Law of Gravitation 247
Making Connections
Attempts are still being made to understand the gravitational force. As we shall see inParticle Physics, modern
physics is exploring the connections of gravity to other forces, space, and time. General relativity alters our view
of gravitation, leading us to think of gravitation as bending space and time.
In the following example, we make a comparison similar to one made by Newton himself. He noted that if the
gravitational force caused the Moon to orbit Earth, then the acceleration due to gravity should equal the centripetal
acceleration of the Moon in its orbit. Newton found that the two accelerations agreed “pretty nearly.”
EXAMPLE 6.6
Earth’s Gravitational Force Is the Centripetal Force Making the Moon Move in a Curved Path
(a) Find the acceleration due to Earth’s gravity at the distance of the Moon.
(b) Calculate the centripetal acceleration needed to keep the Moon in its orbit (assuming a circular orbit about a
fixed Earth), and compare it with the value of the acceleration due to Earth’s gravity that you have just found.
Strategy for (a)
This calculation is the same as the one finding the acceleration due to gravity at Earth’s surface, except that is the
distance from the center of Earth to the center of the Moon. The radius of the Moon’s nearly circular orbit is
.
Solution for (a)
Substituting known values into the expression for found above, remembering that is the mass of Earth not the
Moon, yields
6.46
Strategy for (b)
Centripetal acceleration can be calculated using either form of
6.47
We choose to use the second form:
6.48
where is the angular velocity of the Moon about Earth.
Solution for (b)
Given that the period (the time it takes to make one complete rotation) of the Moon’s orbit is 27.3 days, (d) and
using
6.49
we see that
6.50
PAGE: 266
248 6 • Uniform Circular Motion and Gravitation
The centripetal acceleration is
6.51
The direction of the acceleration is toward the center of the Earth.
Discussion
The centripetal acceleration of the Moon found in (b) differs by less than 1% from the acceleration due to Earth’s
gravity found in (a). This agreement is approximate because the Moon’s orbit is slightly elliptical, and Earth is not
stationary (rather the Earth-Moon system rotates about its center of mass, which is located some 1700 km below
Earth’s surface). The clear implication is that Earth’s gravitational force causes the Moon to orbit Earth.
Why does Earth not remain stationary as the Moon orbits it? This is because, as expected from Newton’s third law, if
Earth exerts a force on the Moon, then the Moon should exert an equal and opposite force on Earth (seeFigure
6.20). We do not sense the Moon’s effect on Earth’s motion, because the Moon’s gravity moves our bodies right
along with Earth but there are other signs on Earth that clearly show the effect of the Moon’s gravitational force as
discussed inSatellites and Kepler's Laws: An Argument for Simplicity.
FIGURE6.20(a) Earth and the Moon rotate approximately once a month around their common center of mass. (b) Their center of mass
orbits the Sun in an elliptical orbit, but Earth’s path around the Sun has “wiggles” in it. Similar wiggles in the paths of stars have been
observed and are considered direct evidence of planets orbiting those stars. This is important because the planets’ reflected light is often
too dim to be observed.
Tides
Ocean tides are one very observable result of the Moon’s gravity acting on Earth.Figure 6.21is a simplified drawing
of the Moon’s position relative to the tides. Because water easily flows on Earth’s surface, a high tide is created on
the side of Earth nearest to the Moon, where the Moon’s gravitational pull is strongest. Why is there also a high tide
on the opposite side of Earth? The answer is that Earth is pulled toward the Moon more than the water on the far
side, because Earth is closer to the Moon. So the water on the side of Earth closest to the Moon is pulled away from
Earth, and Earth is pulled away from water on the far side. As Earth rotates, the tidal bulge (an effect of the tidal
forces between an orbiting natural satellite and the primary planet that it orbits) keeps its orientation with the Moon.
Thus there are two tides per day (the actual tidal period is about 12 hours and 25.2 minutes), because the Moon
moves in its orbit each day as well).
FIGURE6.21The Moon causes ocean tides by attracting the water on the near side more than Earth, and by attracting Earth more than the
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 267
6.5 • Newton’s Universal Law of Gravitation 249
water on the far side. The distances and sizes are not to scale. For this simplified representation of the Earth-Moon system, there are two
high and two low tides per day at any location, because Earth rotates under the tidal bulge.
The Sun also affects tides, although it has about half the effect of the Moon. However, the largest tides, called spring
tides, occur when Earth, the Moon, and the Sun are aligned. The smallest tides, called neap tides, occur when the
Sun is at a angle to the Earth-Moon alignment.
FIGURE6.22(a, b) Spring tides: The highest tides occur when Earth, the Moon, and the Sun are aligned. (c) Neap tide: The lowest tides
occur when the Sun lies at to the Earth-Moon alignment. Note that this figure is not drawn to scale.
Tides are not unique to Earth but occur in many astronomical systems. The most extreme tides occur where the
gravitational force is the strongest and varies most rapidly, such as near black holes (seeFigure 6.23). A few likely
candidates for black holes have been observed in our galaxy. These have masses greater than the Sun but have
diameters only a few kilometers across. The tidal forces near them are so great that they can actually tear matter
from a companion star.
FIGURE6.23A black hole is an object with such strong gravity that not even light can escape it. This black hole was created by the
supernova of one star in a two-star system. The tidal forces created by the black hole are so great that it tears matter from the companion
star. This matter is compressed and heated as it is sucked into the black hole, creating light and X-rays observable from Earth.
”Weightlessness” and Microgravity
In contrast to the tremendous gravitational force near black holes is the apparent gravitational field experienced by
PAGE: 268
250 6 • Uniform Circular Motion and Gravitation
astronauts orbiting Earth. What is the effect of “weightlessness” upon an astronaut who is in orbit for months? Or
what about the effect of weightlessness upon plant growth? Weightlessness doesn’t mean that an astronaut is not
being acted upon by the gravitational force. There is no “zero gravity” in an astronaut’s orbit. The term just means
that the astronaut is in free-fall, accelerating with the acceleration due to gravity. If an elevator cable breaks, the
passengers inside will be in free fall and will experience weightlessness. You can experience short periods of
weightlessness in some rides in amusement parks.
FIGURE6.24Astronauts experiencing weightlessness on board the International Space Station. (credit: NASA)
Microgravityrefers to an environment in which the apparent net acceleration of a body is small compared with that
produced by Earth at its surface. Many interesting biology and physics topics have been studied over the past three
decades in the presence of microgravity. Of immediate concern is the effect on astronauts of extended times in
outer space, such as at the International Space Station. Researchers have observed that muscles will atrophy
(waste away) in this environment. There is also a corresponding loss of bone mass. Study continues on
cardiovascular adaptation to space flight. On Earth, blood pressure is usually higher in the feet than in the head,
because the higher column of blood exerts a downward force on it, due to gravity. When standing, 70% of your blood
is below the level of the heart, while in a horizontal position, just the opposite occurs. What difference does the
absence of this pressure differential have upon the heart?
Some findings in human physiology in space can be clinically important to the management of diseases back on
Earth. On a somewhat negative note, spaceflight is known to affect the human immune system, possibly making the
crew members more vulnerable to infectious diseases. Experiments flown in space also have shown that some
bacteria grow faster in microgravity than they do on Earth. However, on a positive note, studies indicate that
microbial antibiotic production can increase by a factor of two in space-grown cultures. One hopes to be able to
understand these mechanisms so that similar successes can be achieved on the ground. In another area of physics
space research, inorganic crystals and protein crystals have been grown in outer space that have much higher
quality than any grown on Earth, so crystallography studies on their structure can yield much better results.
Plants have evolved with the stimulus of gravity and with gravity sensors. Roots grow downward and shoots grow
upward. Plants might be able to provide a life support system for long duration space missions by regenerating the
atmosphere, purifying water, and producing food. Some studies have indicated that plant growth and development
are not affected by gravity, but there is still uncertainty about structural changes in plants grown in a microgravity
environment.
The Cavendish Experiment: Then and Now
As previously noted, the universal gravitational constant is determined experimentally. This definition was first
done accurately by Henry Cavendish (1731–1810), an English scientist, in 1798, more than 100 years after Newton
published his universal law of gravitation. The measurement of is very basic and important because it determines
the strength of one of the four forces in nature. Cavendish’s experiment was very difficult because he measured the
tiny gravitational attraction between two ordinary-sized masses (tens of kilograms at most), using apparatus like
that inFigure 6.25. Remarkably, his value for differs by less than 1% from the best modern value.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 269
6.5 • Newton’s Universal Law of Gravitation 251
One important consequence of knowing was that an accurate value for Earth’s mass could finally be obtained.
This was done by measuring the acceleration due to gravity as accurately as possible and then calculating the mass
of Earth from the relationship Newton’s universal law of gravitation gives
6.52
where is the mass of the object, is the mass of Earth, and is the distance to the center of Earth (the distance
between the centers of mass of the object and Earth). SeeFigure 6.18. The mass of the object cancels, leaving an
equation for :
6.53
Rearranging to solve for yields
6.54
So can be calculated because all quantities on the right, including the radius of Earth , are known from direct
measurements. We shall see inSatellites and Kepler's Laws: An Argument for Simplicitythat knowing also allows
for the determination of astronomical masses. Interestingly, of all the fundamental constants in physics, is by far
the least well determined.
The Cavendish experiment is also used to explore other aspects of gravity. One of the most interesting questions is
whether the gravitational force depends on substance as well as mass—for example, whether one kilogram of lead
exerts the same gravitational pull as one kilogram of water. A Hungarian scientist named Roland von Eötvös
pioneered this inquiry early in the 20th century. He found, with an accuracy of five parts per billion, that the
gravitational force does not depend on the substance. Such experiments continue today, and have improved upon
Eötvös’ measurements. Cavendish-type experiments such as those of Eric Adelberger and others at the University of
Washington, have also put severe limits on the possibility of a fifth force and have verified a major prediction of
general relativity—that gravitational energy contributes to rest mass. Ongoing measurements there use a torsion
balance and a parallel plate (not spheres, as Cavendish used) to examine how Newton’s law of gravitation works
over sub-millimeter distances. On this small-scale, do gravitational effects depart from the inverse square law? So
far, no deviation has been observed.
FIGURE6.25Cavendish used an apparatus like this to measure the gravitational attraction between the two suspended spheres ( ) and
the two on the stand ( ) by observing the amount of torsion (twisting) created in the fiber. Distance between the masses can be varied to
check the dependence of the force on distance. Modern experiments of this type continue to explore gravity.
PAGE: 270
252 6 • Uniform Circular Motion and Gravitation
6.6 Satellites and Kepler’s Laws: An Argument for Simplicity
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• State Kepler’s laws of planetary motion.
• Derive the third Kepler’s law for circular orbits.
• Discuss the Ptolemaic model of the universe.
Examples of gravitational orbits abound. Hundreds of artificial satellites orbit Earth together with thousands of
pieces of debris. The Moon’s orbit about Earth has intrigued humans from time immemorial. The orbits of planets,
asteroids, meteors, and comets about the Sun are no less interesting. If we look further, we see almost
unimaginable numbers of stars, galaxies, and other celestial objects orbiting one another and interacting through
gravity.
All these motions are governed by gravitational force, and it is possible to describe them to various degrees of
precision. Precise descriptions of complex systems must be made with large computers. However, we can describe
an important class of orbits without the use of computers, and we shall find it instructive to study them. These orbits
have the following characteristics:
1. A small mass orbits a much larger mass . This allows us to view the motion as if were stationary—in
fact, as if from an inertial frame of reference placed on —without significant error. Mass is the satellite of
, if the orbit is gravitationally bound.
2. The system is isolated from other masses. This allows us to neglect any small effects due to outside masses.
The conditions are satisfied, to good approximation, by Earth’s satellites (including the Moon), by objects orbiting
the Sun, and by the satellites of other planets. Historically, planets were studied first, and there is a classical set of
three laws, called Kepler’s laws of planetary motion, that describe the orbits of all bodies satisfying the two previous
conditions (not just planets in our solar system). These descriptive laws are named for the German astronomer
Johannes Kepler (1571–1630), who devised them after careful study (over some 20 years) of a large amount of
meticulously recorded observations of planetary motion done by Tycho Brahe (1546–1601). Such careful collection
and detailed recording of methods and data are hallmarks of good science. Data constitute the evidence from which
new interpretations and meanings can be constructed.
Kepler’s Laws of Planetary Motion
Kepler’s First Law
The orbit of each planet about the Sun is an ellipse with the Sun at one focus.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 271
6.6 • Satellites and Kepler’s Laws: An Argument for Simplicity 253
FIGURE6.26(a) An ellipse is a closed curve such that the sum of the distances from a point on the curve to the two foci ( and ) is a
constant. You can draw an ellipse as shown by putting a pin at each focus, and then placing a string around a pencil and the pins and tracing
a line on paper. A circle is a special case of an ellipse in which the two foci coincide (thus any point on the circle is the same distance from
the center). (b) For any closed gravitational orbit, follows an elliptical path with at one focus. Kepler’s first law states this fact for
planets orbiting the Sun.
Kepler’s Second Law
Each planet moves so that an imaginary line drawn from the Sun to the planet sweeps out equal areas in equal times
(seeFigure 6.27).
Kepler’s Third Law
The ratio of the squares of the periods of any two planets about the Sun is equal to the ratio of the cubes of their
average distances from the Sun. In equation form, this is
6.55
where is the period (time for one orbit) and is the average radius. This equation is valid only for comparing two
small masses orbiting the same large one. Most importantly, this is a descriptive equation only, giving no information
as to the cause of the equality.
PAGE: 272
254 6 • Uniform Circular Motion and Gravitation
FIGURE6.27The shaded regions have equal areas. It takes equal times for to go from A to B, from C to D, and from E to F. The mass
moves fastest when it is closest to . Kepler’s second law was originally devised for planets orbiting the Sun, but it has broader validity.
Note again that while, for historical reasons, Kepler’s laws are stated for planets orbiting the Sun, they are actually
valid for all bodies satisfying the two previously stated conditions.
EXAMPLE 6.7
Find the Time for One Orbit of an Earth Satellite
Given that the Moon orbits Earth each 27.3 d and that it is an average distance of from the center of
Earth, calculate the period of an artificial satellite orbiting at an average altitude of 1500 km above Earth’s surface.
Strategy
The period, or time for one orbit, is related to the radius of the orbit by Kepler’s third law, given in mathematical
form in . Let us use the subscript 1 for the Moon and the subscript 2 for the satellite. We are asked to find
. The given information tells us that the orbital radius of the Moon is , and that the period of
the Moon is . The height of the artificial satellite above Earth’s surface is given, and so we must add the
radius of Earth (6380 km) to get . Now all quantities are known, and so can
be found.
Solution
Kepler’s third law is
6.56
To solve for , we cross-multiply and take the square root, yielding
6.57
6.58
Substituting known values yields
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 273
6.6 • Satellites and Kepler’s Laws: An Argument for Simplicity 255
6.59
Discussion
This is a reasonable period for a satellite in a fairly low orbit. It is interesting that any satellite at this altitude will
orbit in the same amount of time. This fact is related to the condition that the satellite’s mass is small compared
with that of Earth.
People immediately search for deeper meaning when broadly applicable laws, like Kepler’s, are discovered. It was
Newton who took the next giant step when he proposed the law of universal gravitation. While Kepler was able to
discoverwhatwas happening, Newton discovered that gravitational force was the cause.
Derivation of Kepler’s Third Law for Circular Orbits
We shall derive Kepler’s third law, starting with Newton’s laws of motion and his universal law of gravitation. The
point is to demonstrate that the force of gravity is the cause for Kepler’s laws (although we will only derive the third
one).
Let us consider a circular orbit of a small mass around a large mass , satisfying the two conditions stated at the
beginning of this section. Gravity supplies the centripetal force to mass . Starting with Newton’s second law
applied to circular motion,
6.60
The net external force on mass is gravity, and so we substitute the force of gravity for :
6.61
The mass cancels, yielding
6.62
The fact that cancels out is another aspect of the oft-noted fact that at a given location all masses fall with the
same acceleration. Here we see that at a given orbital radius , all masses orbit at the same speed. (This was
implied by the result of the preceding worked example.) Now, to get at Kepler’s third law, we must get the period
into the equation. By definition, period is the time for one complete orbit. Now the average speed is the
circumference divided by the period—that is,
6.63
Substituting this into the previous equation gives
6.64
Solving for yields
6.65
Using subscripts 1 and 2 to denote two different satellites, and taking the ratio of the last equation for satellite 1 to
satellite 2 yields
6.66
PAGE: 274
256 6 • Uniform Circular Motion and Gravitation
This is Kepler’s third law. Note that Kepler’s third law is valid only for comparing satellites of the same parent body,
because only then does the mass of the parent body cancel.
Now consider what we get if we solve for the ratio . We obtain a relationship that can be used to
determine the mass of a parent body from the orbits of its satellites:
6.67
If and are known for a satellite, then the mass of the parent can be calculated. This principle has been used
extensively to find the masses of heavenly bodies that have satellites. Furthermore, the ratio should be a
constant for all satellites of the same parent body (because ). (SeeTable 6.2).
It is clear fromTable 6.2that the ratio of is constant, at least to the third digit, for all listed satellites of the
Sun, and for those of Jupiter. Small variations in that ratio have two causes—uncertainties in the and data, and
perturbations of the orbits due to other bodies. Interestingly, those perturbations can be—and have been—used to
predict the location of new planets and moons. This is another verification of Newton’s universal law of gravitation.
Making Connections
Newton’s universal law of gravitation is modified by Einstein’s general theory of relativity, as we shall see in
Particle Physics. Newton’s gravity is not seriously in error—it was and still is an extremely good approximation
for most situations. Einstein’s modification is most noticeable in extremely large gravitational fields, such as
near black holes. However, general relativity also explains such phenomena as small but long-known deviations
of the orbit of the planet Mercury from classical predictions.
The Case for Simplicity
The development of the universal law of gravitation by Newton played a pivotal role in the history of ideas. While it is
beyond the scope of this text to cover that history in any detail, we note some important points. The definition of
planet set in 2006 by the International Astronomical Union (IAU) states that in the solar system, a planet is a
celestial body that:
1. is in orbit around the Sun,
2. has sufficient mass to assume hydrostatic equilibrium and
3. has cleared the neighborhood around its orbit.
A non-satellite body fulfilling only the first two of the above criteria is classified as “dwarf planet.”
In 2006, Pluto was demoted to a ‘dwarf planet’ after scientists revised their definition of what constitutes a “true”
planet.
Parent Satellite Average orbital radiusr(km) PeriodT(y) r3/T2(km3/ y2)
Earth Moon 0.07481
Sun Mercury 0.2409
Venus 0.6150
Earth 1.000
Mars 1.881
TABLE6.2Orbital Data and Kepler’s Third Law
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 275
6.6 • Satellites and Kepler’s Laws: An Argument for Simplicity 257
Parent Satellite Average orbital radiusr(km) PeriodT(y) r3/T2(km3/ y2)
Jupiter 11.86
Saturn 29.46
Neptune 164.8
Pluto 248.3
Jupiter Io 0.00485 (1.77 d)
Europa 0.00972 (3.55 d)
Ganymede 0.0196 (7.16 d)
Callisto 0.0457 (16.19 d)
TABLE6.2Orbital Data and Kepler’s Third Law
The universal law of gravitation is a good example of a physical principle that is very broadly applicable. That single
equation for the gravitational force describes all situations in which gravity acts. It gives a cause for a vast number of
effects, such as the orbits of the planets and moons in the solar system. It epitomizes the underlying unity and
simplicity of physics.
Before the discoveries of Kepler, Copernicus, Galileo, Newton, and others, the solar system was thought to revolve
around Earth as shown inFigure 6.28(a). This is called the Ptolemaic view, for the Greek philosopher who lived in
the second century AD. This model is characterized by a list of facts for the motions of planets with no cause and
effect explanation. There tended to be a different rule for each heavenly body and a general lack of simplicity.
Figure 6.28(b) represents the modern or Copernican model. In this model, a small set of rules and a single
underlying force explain not only all motions in the solar system, but all other situations involving gravity. The
breadth and simplicity of the laws of physics are compelling. As our knowledge of nature has grown, the basic
simplicity of its laws has become ever more evident.
FIGURE6.28(a) The Ptolemaic model of the universe has Earth at the center with the Moon, the planets, the Sun, and the stars revolving
about it in complex superpositions of circular paths. This geocentric model, which can be made progressively more accurate by adding
more circles, is purely descriptive, containing no hints as to what are the causes of these motions. (b) The Copernican model has the Sun at
the center of the solar system. It is fully explained by a small number of laws of physics, including Newton’s universal law of gravitation.
PAGE: 276
258 6 • Glossary
Glossary
angular velocity , the rate of change of the angle aid of friction between the tires and the road; the
with which an object moves on a circular path net external force on the vehicle equals the
arc length , the distance traveled by an object horizontal centripetal force in the absence of friction
along a circular path ideal speed the maximum safe speed at which a
banked curve the curve in a road that is sloping in a vehicle can turn on a curve without the aid of friction
manner that helps a vehicle negotiate the curve between the tire and the road
center of mass the point where the entire mass of an microgravity an environment in which the apparent
object can be thought to be concentrated net acceleration of a body is small compared with
centrifugal force a fictitious force that tends to throw that produced by Earth at its surface
an object off when the object is rotating in a non- Newton’s universal law of gravitation every particle
inertial frame of reference in the universe attracts every other particle with a
centripetal acceleration the acceleration of an force along a line joining them; the force is directly
object moving in a circle, directed toward the center proportional to the product of their masses and
centripetal force any net force causing uniform inversely proportional to the square of the distance
circular motion between them
Coriolis force the fictitious force causing the non-inertial frame of reference an accelerated
apparent deflection of moving objects when viewed frame of reference
in a rotating frame of reference pit a tiny indentation on the spiral track moulded into
fictitious force a force having no physical origin the top of the polycarbonate layer of CD
gravitational constant,G a proportionality factor radians a unit of angle measurement
used in the equation for Newton’s universal law of radius of curvature radius of a circular path
gravitation; it is a universal constant—that is, it is rotation angle the ratio of the arc length to the radius
thought to be the same everywhere in the universe of curvature on a circular path:
ideal angle the angle at which a car can turn safely ultracentrifuge a centrifuge optimized for spinning a
on a steep curve, which is in proportion to the ideal rotor at very high speeds
speed uniform circular motion the motion of an object in a
ideal banking the sloping of a curve in a road, where circular path at constant speed
the angle of the slope allows the vehicle to
negotiate the curve at a certain speed without the
Section Summary
6.1Rotation Angle and Angular Velocity (rad/s). Linear velocity and angular velocity are
related by
• Uniform circular motion is motion in a circle at
constant speed. The rotation angle is defined
as the ratio of the arc length to the radius of
curvature: 6.2Centripetal Acceleration
• Centripetal acceleration is the acceleration
where arc length is distance traveled along a experienced while in uniform circular motion. It
circular path and is the radius of curvature of the always points toward the center of rotation. It is
circular path. The quantity is measured in units perpendicular to the linear velocity and has the
of radians (rad), for which magnitude
• The conversion between radians and degrees is
• The unit of centripetal acceleration is .
.
• Angular velocity is the rate of change of an 6.3Centripetal Force
angle,
• Centripetal force is any force causing uniform
circular motion. It is a “center-seeking” force that
always points toward the center of rotation. It is
where a rotation takes place in a time . The
perpendicular to linear velocity and has
units of angular velocity are radians per second
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 277
6 • Conceptual Questions 259
magnitude orbiting a larger mass in near-isolation.
Kepler’s laws of planetary motion are then as
which can also be expressed as follows:
Kepler’s first law
The orbit of each planet about the Sun is an ellipse
with the Sun at one focus.
Kepler’s second law
6.4Fictitious Forces and Non-inertial
Each planet moves so that an imaginary line drawn
Frames: The Coriolis Force
from the Sun to the planet sweeps out equal areas
• Rotating and accelerated frames of reference are in equal times.
non-inertial.
Kepler’s third law
• Fictitious forces, such as the Coriolis force, are
needed to explain motion in such frames. The ratio of the squares of the periods of any two
planets about the Sun is equal to the ratio of the
6.5Newton’s Universal Law of Gravitation
cubes of their average distances from the Sun:
• Newton’s universal law of gravitation: Every
particle in the universe attracts every other
particle with a force along a line joining them. The
force is directly proportional to the product of their where is the period (time for one orbit) and is
masses and inversely proportional to the square of the average radius of the orbit.
the distance between them. In equation form, this
• The period and radius of a satellite’s orbit about a
is
larger body are related by
where F is the magnitude of the gravitational force.
or
is the gravitational constant, given by
.
• Newton’s law of gravitation applies universally.
6.6Satellites and Kepler’s Laws: An
Argument for Simplicity
• Kepler’s laws are stated for a small mass
Conceptual Questions
6.1Rotation Angle and Angular Velocity 4. Define centripetal force. Can any type of force (for
example, tension, gravitational force, friction, and
1. There is an analogy between rotational and linear
so on) be a centripetal force? Can any combination
physical quantities. What rotational quantities are
of forces be a centripetal force?
analogous to distance and velocity?
5. If centripetal force is directed toward the center,
why do you feel that you are ‘thrown’ away from the
6.2Centripetal Acceleration
center as a car goes around a curve? Explain.
2. Can centripetal acceleration change the speed of
circular motion? Explain.
6.3Centripetal Force
3. If you wish to reduce the stress (which is related to
centripetal force) on high-speed tires, would you
use large- or small-diameter tires? Explain.
PAGE: 278
260 6 • Conceptual Questions
6. Race car drivers routinely cut corners as shown in 8. What is the direction of the force exerted by the car
Figure 6.29. Explain how this allows the curve to be on the passenger as the car goes over the top of the
taken at the greatest speed. amusement ride pictured inFigure 6.30under the
following circumstances:
(a) The car goes over the top at such a speed that
the gravitational force is the only force acting?
(b) The car goes over the top faster than this speed?
(c) The car goes over the top slower than this
speed?
9. As a skater forms a circle, what force is responsible
for making her turn? Use a free body diagram in
your answer.
10. Suppose a child is riding on a merry-go-round at a
distance about halfway between its center and edge.
She has a lunch box resting on wax paper, so that there
is very little friction between it and the merry-go-
round. Which path shown inFigure 6.31will the lunch
box take when she lets go? The lunch box leaves a trail
in the dust on the merry-go-round. Is that trail straight,
curved to the left, or curved to the right? Explain your
FIGURE6.29Two paths around a race track curve are shown. answer.
Race car drivers will take the inside path (called cutting the
corner) whenever possible because it allows them to take the
curve at the highest speed.
7. A number of amusement parks have rides that make
vertical loops like the one shown inFigure 6.30. For
safety, the cars are attached to the rails in such a way
that they cannot fall off. If the car goes over the top at
just the right speed, gravity alone will supply the
centripetal force. What other force acts and what is its
direction if:
(a) The car goes over the top at faster than this speed?
(b)The car goes over the top at slower than this speed?
FIGURE6.31A child riding on a merry-go-round releases her
lunch box at point P. This is a view from above the clockwise
rotation. Assuming it slides with negligible friction, will it follow
path A, B, or C, as viewed from Earth’s frame of reference? What
will be the shape of the path it leaves in the dust on the merry-go-
round?
11. Do you feel yourself thrown to either side when
you negotiate a curve that is ideally banked for
your car’s speed? What is the direction of the force
exerted on you by the car seat?
FIGURE6.30Amusement rides with a vertical loop are an
example of a form of curved motion.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 279
6 • Conceptual Questions 261
12. Suppose a mass is moving in a circular path on a 15. In one amusement park ride, riders enter a large
frictionless table as shown in figure. In the Earth’s vertical barrel and stand against the wall on its
frame of reference, there is no centrifugal force horizontal floor. The barrel is spun up and the floor
pulling the mass away from the centre of rotation, drops away. Riders feel as if they are pinned to the
yet there is a very real force stretching the string wall by a force something like the gravitational
attaching the mass to the nail. Using concepts force. This is a fictitious force sensed and used by
related to centripetal force and Newton’s third the riders to explain events in the rotating frame of
law, explain what force stretches the string, reference of the barrel. Explain in an inertial frame
identifying its physical origin. of reference (Earth is nearly one) what pins the
riders to the wall, and identify all of the real forces
acting on them.
16. Action at a distance, such as is the case for gravity,
was once thought to be illogical and therefore
untrue. What is the ultimate determinant of the
truth in physics, and why was this action
ultimately accepted?
17. Two friends are having a conversation. Anna says a
satellite in orbit is in freefall because the satellite
keeps falling toward Earth. Tom says a satellite in
orbit is not in freefall because the acceleration
due to gravity is not 9.80 . Who do you agree
with and why?
18. A non-rotating frame of reference placed at the
center of the Sun is very nearly an inertial one.
FIGURE6.32A mass attached to a nail on a frictionless
table moves in a circular path. The force stretching the string Why is it not exactly an inertial frame?
is real and not fictional. What is the physical origin of the
force on the string?
6.5Newton’s Universal Law of Gravitation
19. Action at a distance, such as is the case for gravity,
6.4Fictitious Forces and Non-inertial
was once thought to be illogical and therefore
Frames: The Coriolis Force
untrue. What is the ultimate determinant of the
13. When a toilet is flushed or a sink is drained, the truth in physics, and why was this action
water (and other material) begins to rotate about ultimately accepted?
the drain on the way down. Assuming no initial 20. Two friends are having a conversation. Anna says a
rotation and a flow initially directly straight toward satellite in orbit is in freefall because the satellite
the drain, explain what causes the rotation and keeps falling toward Earth. Tom says a satellite in
which direction it has in the northern hemisphere. orbit is not in freefall because the acceleration
(Note that this is a small effect and in most toilets due to gravity is not . Who do you agree
the rotation is caused by directional water jets.) with and why?
Would the direction of rotation reverse if water 21. Draw a free body diagram for a satellite in an
were forced up the drain? elliptical orbit showing why its speed increases as
14. Is there a real force that throws water from it approaches its parent body and decreases as it
clothes during the spin cycle of a washing moves away.
machine? Explain how the water is removed. 22. Newton’s laws of motion and gravity were among
the first to convincingly demonstrate the
underlying simplicity and unity in nature. Many
other examples have since been discovered, and
we now expect to find such underlying order in
complex situations. Is there proof that such order
will always be found in new explorations?
PAGE: 280
262 6 • Problems & Exercises
6.6Satellites and Kepler’s Laws: An
Argument for Simplicity
23. In what frame(s) of reference are Kepler’s laws
valid? Are Kepler’s laws purely descriptive, or do
they contain causal information?
Problems & Exercises
6.1Rotation Angle and Angular Velocity 9. Construct Your Own Problem
Consider an amusement park ride in which
1. Semi-trailer trucks have an odometer on one hub of
participants are rotated about a vertical axis in a
a trailer wheel. The hub is weighted so that it does
cylinder with vertical walls. Once the angular
not rotate, but it contains gears to count the
velocity reaches its full value, the floor drops away
number of wheel revolutions—it then calculates the
and friction between the walls and the riders
distance traveled. If the wheel has a 1.15 m
prevents them from sliding down. Construct a
diameter and goes through 200,000 rotations, how
problem in which you calculate the necessary
many kilometers should the odometer read?
angular velocity that assures the riders will not slide
2. Microwave ovens rotate at a rate of about 6 rev/
down the wall. Include a free body diagram of a
min. What is this in revolutions per second? What is
single rider. Among the variables to consider are the
the angular velocity in radians per second?
radius of the cylinder and the coefficients of friction
3. An automobile with 0.260 m radius tires travels
between the riders’ clothing and the wall.
80,000 km before wearing them out. How many
revolutions do the tires make, neglecting any
6.2Centripetal Acceleration
backing up and any change in radius due to wear?
4. (a) What is the period of rotation of Earth in 10. A fairground ride spins its occupants inside a flying
seconds? (b) What is the angular velocity of Earth? saucer-shaped container. If the horizontal circular
(c) Given that Earth has a radius of at path the riders follow has an 8.00 m radius, at
its equator, what is the linear velocity at Earth’s how many revolutions per minute will the riders be
surface? subjected to a centripetal acceleration whose
5. A baseball pitcher brings his arm forward during a magnitude is 1.50 times that due to gravity?
pitch, rotating the forearm about the elbow. If the 11. A runner taking part in the 200 m dash must run
velocity of the ball in the pitcher’s hand is 35.0 m/s around the end of a track that has a circular arc
and the ball is 0.300 m from the elbow joint, what is with a radius of curvature of 30 m. If the runner
the angular velocity of the forearm? completes the 200 m dash in 23.2 s and runs at
6. In lacrosse, a ball is thrown from a net on the end of constant speed throughout the race, what is the
a stick by rotating the stick and forearm about the magnitude of their centripetal acceleration as they
elbow. If the angular velocity of the ball about the run the curved portion of the track?
elbow joint is 30.0 rad/s and the ball is 1.30 m from 12. Taking the age of Earth to be about years
the elbow joint, what is the velocity of the ball? and assuming its orbital radius of m
7. A truck with 0.420-m-radius tires travels at 32.0 m/ has not changed and is circular, calculate the
s. What is the angular velocity of the rotating tires in approximate total distance Earth has traveled
radians per second? What is this in rev/min? since its birth (in a frame of reference stationary
8. Integrated ConceptsWhen kicking a football, the with respect to the Sun).
kicker rotates his leg about the hip joint. 13. The propeller of a World War II fighter plane is
(a) If the velocity of the tip of the kicker’s shoe is 2.30 m in diameter.
35.0 m/s and the hip joint is 1.05 m from the tip of (a) What is its angular velocity in radians per
the shoe, what is the shoe tip’s angular velocity? second if it spins at 1200 rev/min?
(b) The shoe is in contact with the initially (b) What is the linear speed of its tip at this
stationary 0.500 kg football for 20.0 ms. What angular velocity if the plane is stationary on the
average force is exerted on the football to give it a tarmac?
velocity of 20.0 m/s? (c) What is the centripetal acceleration of the
(c) Find the maximum range of the football, propeller tip under these conditions? Calculate it
neglecting air resistance. in meters per second squared and convert to
multiples of .
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 281
6 • Problems & Exercises 263
14. An ordinary workshop grindstone has a radius of 19. A rotating space station is said to create “artificial
7.50 cm and rotates at 6500 rev/min. gravity”—a loosely-defined term used for an
(a) Calculate the magnitude of the centripetal acceleration that would be crudely similar to
acceleration at its edge in meters per second gravity. The outer wall of the rotating space station
squared and convert it to multiples of . would become a floor for the astronauts, and
(b) What is the linear speed of a point on its edge? centripetal acceleration supplied by the floor
15. Helicopter blades withstand tremendous stresses. would allow astronauts to exercise and maintain
In addition to supporting the weight of a muscle and bone strength more naturally than in
helicopter, they are spun at rapid rates and non-rotating space environments. If the space
experience large centripetal accelerations, station is 200 m in diameter, what angular velocity
especially at the tip. would produce an “artificial gravity” of
(a) Calculate the magnitude of the centripetal at the rim?
acceleration at the tip of a 4.00 m long helicopter 20. At takeoff, a commercial jet has a 60.0 m/s speed.
blade that rotates at 300 rev/min. Its tires have a diameter of 0.850 m.
(b) Compare the linear speed of the tip with the (a) At how many rev/min are the tires rotating?
speed of sound (taken to be 340 m/s). (b) What is the centripetal acceleration at the edge
16. Olympic ice skaters are able to spin at about 5 rev/ of the tire?
s. (c) With what force must a determined
(a) What is their angular velocity in radians per bacterium cling to the rim?
second? (d) Take the ratio of this force to the bacterium’s
(b) What is the centripetal acceleration of the weight.
skater’s nose if it is 0.120 m from the axis of 21. Integrated Concepts
rotation? Riders in an amusement park ride shaped like a
(c) An exceptional skater named Dick Button was Viking ship hung from a large pivot are rotated
able to spin much faster in the 1950s than anyone back and forth like a rigid pendulum. Sometime
since—at about 9 rev/s. What was the centripetal near the middle of the ride, the ship is
acceleration of the tip of his nose, assuming it is at momentarily motionless at the top of its circular
0.120 m radius? arc. The ship then swings down under the
(d) Comment on the magnitudes of the influence of gravity. The speed at the bottom of
accelerations found. It is reputed that Button the arc is 23.4 m/s.
ruptured small blood vessels during his spins. (a) What is the centripetal acceleration at the
17. What percentage of the acceleration at Earth’s bottom of the arc?
surface is the acceleration due to gravity at the (b) Draw a free body diagram of the forces acting
position of a satellite located 300 km above Earth? on a rider at the bottom of the arc.
18. Verify that the linear speed of an ultracentrifuge is (c) Find the force exerted by the ride on a 60.0 kg
about 0.50 km/s, and Earth in its orbit is about 30 rider and compare it to her weight.
km/s by calculating: (d) Discuss whether the answer seems
(a) The linear speed of a point on an reasonable.
ultracentrifuge 0.100 m from its center, rotating at 22. Unreasonable Results
50,000 rev/min. A mother pushes her child on a swing so that his
(b) The linear speed of Earth in its orbit about the speed is 9.00 m/s at the lowest point of his path.
Sun (use data from the text on the radius of The swing is suspended 2.00 m above the child’s
Earth’s orbit and approximate it as being circular). center of mass.
(a) What is the magnitude of the centripetal
acceleration of the child at the low point?
(b) What is the magnitude of the force the child
exerts on the seat if his mass is 18.0 kg?
(c) What is unreasonable about these results?
(d) Which premises are unreasonable or
inconsistent?
PAGE: 282
264 6 • Problems & Exercises
6.3Centripetal Force 28. Part of riding a bicycle involves leaning at the
correct angle when making a turn, as seen in
23. (a) A 22.0 kg child is riding a playground merry-go-
Figure 6.33. To be stable, the force exerted by the
round that is rotating at 40.0 rev/min. What
ground must be on a line going through the center
centripetal force must she exert to stay on if she is
of gravity. The force on the bicycle wheel can be
1.25 m from its center?
resolved into two perpendicular
(b) What centripetal force does she need to stay
components—friction parallel to the road (this
on an amusement park merry-go-round that
must supply the centripetal force), and the vertical
rotates at 3.00 rev/min if she is 8.00 m from its
normal force (which must equal the system’s
center?
weight).
(c) Compare each force with her weight.
(a) Show that (as defined in the figure) is related
24. Calculate the centripetal force on the end of a 100
to the speed and radius of curvature of the turn
m (radius) wind turbine blade that is rotating at
in the same way as for an ideally banked
0.5 rev/s. Assume the mass is 4 kg.
roadway—that is,
25. What is the ideal banking angle for a gentle turn of
(b) Calculate for a 12.0 m/s turn of radius 30.0
1.20 km radius on a highway with a 105 km/h
m (as in a race).
speed limit (about 65 mi/h), assuming everyone
travels at the limit?
26. What is the ideal speed to take a 100 m radius
curve banked at a 20.0° angle?
27. (a) What is the radius of a bobsled turn banked at
75.0° and taken at 30.0 m/s, assuming it is ideally
banked?
(b) Calculate the centripetal acceleration.
(c) Does this acceleration seem large to you?
FIGURE6.33A bicyclist negotiating a turn on level ground
must lean at the correct angle—the ability to do this
becomes instinctive. The force of the ground on the wheel
needs to be on a line through the center of gravity. The net
external force on the system is the centripetal force. The
vertical component of the force on the wheel cancels the
weight of the system while its horizontal component must
supply the centripetal force. This process produces a
relationship among the angle , the speed , and the radius
of curvature of the turn similar to that for the ideal banking
of roadways.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 283
6 • Problems & Exercises 265
29. A large centrifuge, like the one shown inFigure 6.34(a), 30. Integrated Concepts
is used to expose aspiring astronauts to accelerations If a car takes a banked curve at less than the ideal
similar to those experienced in rocket launches and speed, friction is needed to keep it from sliding
atmospheric reentries. toward the inside of the curve (a real problem on
(a) At what angular velocity is the centripetal icy mountain roads). (a) Calculate the ideal speed
acceleration if the rider is 15.0 m from the center to take a 100 m radius curve banked at 15.0º. (b)
of rotation? What is the minimum coefficient of friction needed
(b) The rider’s cage hangs on a pivot at the end of the for a frightened driver to take the same curve at
arm, allowing it to swing outward during rotation as 20.0 km/h?
shown inFigure 6.34(b). At what angle below the 31. Modern roller coasters have vertical loops like the
horizontal will the cage hang when the centripetal one shown inFigure 6.35. The radius of curvature
acceleration is ? (Hint: The arm supplies is smaller at the top than on the sides so that the
centripetal force and supports the weight of the cage. downward centripetal acceleration at the top will
Draw a free body diagram of the forces to see what the be greater than the acceleration due to gravity,
angle should be.) keeping the passengers pressed firmly into their
seats. What is the speed of the roller coaster at
the top of the loop if the radius of curvature there
is 15.0 m and the downward acceleration of the
car is 1.50 g?
FIGURE6.35Teardrop-shaped loops are used in the latest
roller coasters so that the radius of curvature gradually
decreases to a minimum at the top. This means that the
centripetal acceleration builds from zero to a maximum at
the top and gradually decreases again. A circular loop would
cause a jolting change in acceleration at entry, a
disadvantage discovered long ago in railroad curve design.
With a small radius of curvature at the top, the centripetal
acceleration can more easily be kept greater than so that
the passengers do not lose contact with their seats nor do
they need seat belts to keep them in place.
32. Unreasonable Results
(a) Calculate the minimum coefficient of friction
FIGURE6.34(a) NASA centrifuge used to subject trainees to
needed for a car to negotiate an unbanked 50.0 m
accelerations similar to those experienced in rocket launches and
reentries. (credit: NASA) (b) Rider in cage showing how the cage radius curve at 30.0 m/s.
pivots outward during rotation. This allows the total force exerted (b) What is unreasonable about the result?
on the rider by the cage to be along its axis at all times.
(c) Which premises are unreasonable or
inconsistent?
PAGE: 284
266 6 • Problems & Exercises
6.5Newton’s Universal Law of Gravitation 40. The existence of the dwarf planet Pluto was
proposed based on irregularities in Neptune’s
33. (a) Calculate Earth’s mass given the acceleration
orbit. Pluto was subsequently discovered near its
due to gravity at the North Pole is and
predicted position. But it now appears that the
the radius of the Earth is 6371 km from center to
discovery was fortuitous, because Pluto is small
pole.
and the irregularities in Neptune’s orbit were not
(b) Compare this with the accepted value of
well known. To illustrate that Pluto has a minor
.
effect on the orbit of Neptune compared with the
34. (a) Calculate the magnitude of the acceleration
closest planet to Neptune:
due to gravity on the surface of Earth due to the
(a) Calculate the acceleration due to gravity at
Moon.
Neptune due to Pluto when they are
(b) Calculate the magnitude of the acceleration
apart, as they are at present. The
due to gravity at Earth due to the Sun.
mass of Pluto is .
(c) Take the ratio of the Moon’s acceleration to the
(b) Calculate the acceleration due to gravity at
Sun’s and comment on why the tides are
Neptune due to Uranus, presently about
predominantly due to the Moon in spite of this
apart, and compare it with that
number.
due to Pluto. The mass of Uranus is
35. (a) What is the acceleration due to gravity on the
.
surface of the Moon?
41. (a) The Sun orbits the Milky Way galaxy once each
(b) On the surface of Mars? The mass of Mars is
, with a roughly circular orbit
and its radius is .
averaging light years in radius. (A light
36. (a) Calculate the acceleration due to gravity on the
year is the distance traveled by light in 1 y.)
surface of the Sun.
Calculate the centripetal acceleration of the Sun in
(b) By what factor would your weight increase if
its galactic orbit. Does your result support the
you could stand on the Sun? (Never mind that you
contention that a nearly inertial frame of reference
cannot.)
can be located at the Sun?
37. The Moon and Earth rotate about their common
(b) Calculate the average speed of the Sun in its
center of mass, which is located about 4700 km
galactic orbit. Does the answer surprise you?
from the center of Earth. (This is 1690 km below
42. Unreasonable Result
the surface.)
A mountain 10.0 km from a person exerts a
(a) Calculate the magnitude of the acceleration
gravitational force on him equal to 2.00% of his
due to the Moon’s gravity at that point.
weight.
(b) Calculate the magnitude of the centripetal
(a) Calculate the mass of the mountain.
acceleration of the center of Earth as it rotates
(b) Compare the mountain’s mass with that of
about that point once each lunar month (about
Earth.
27.3 d) and compare it with the acceleration found
(c) What is unreasonable about these results?
in part (a). Comment on whether or not they are
(d) Which premises are unreasonable or
equal and why they should or should not be.
inconsistent? (Note that accurate gravitational
38. Solve part (b) ofExample 6.6using .
measurements can easily detect the effect of
39. (a) Calculate the magnitude of the gravitational
nearby mountains and variations in local geology.)
force exerted on a 4.20 kg baby by a 100 kg father
0.200 m away at birth (he is assisting, so he is
6.6Satellites and Kepler’s Laws: An
close to the child).
Argument for Simplicity
(b) Calculate the magnitude of the force on the
baby due to Jupiter if it is at its closest distance to 43. A geosynchronous Earth satellite is one that has
Earth, some away. How does the an orbital period of precisely 1 day. Such orbits are
force of Jupiter on the baby compare to the force useful for communication and weather
of the father on the baby? Other objects in the observation because the satellite remains above
room and the hospital building also exert similar the same point on Earth (provided it orbits in the
gravitational forces. (Of course, there could be an equatorial plane in the same direction as Earth’s
unknown force acting, but scientists first need to rotation). Calculate the radius of such an orbit
be convinced that there is even an effect, much based on the data for the moon inTable 6.2.
less that an unknown force causes it.)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 285
6 • Problems & Exercises 267
44. Calculate the mass of the Sun based on data for 49. Unreasonable Results
Earth’s orbit and compare the value obtained with (a) Based on Kepler’s laws and information on the
the Sun’s actual mass. orbital characteristics of the Moon, calculate the
45. Find the mass of Jupiter based on data for the orbital radius for an Earth satellite having a period
orbit of one of its moons, and compare your result of 1.00 h. (b) What is unreasonable about this
with its actual mass. result? (c) What is unreasonable or inconsistent
46. Find the ratio of the mass of Jupiter to that of about the premise of a 1.00 h orbit?
Earth based on data inTable 6.2. 50. Construct Your Own Problem
47. Astronomical observations of our Milky Way On February 14, 2000, the NEAR spacecraft was
galaxy indicate that it has a mass of about successfully inserted into orbit around Eros,
solar masses. A star orbiting on the becoming the first artificial satellite of an asteroid.
galaxy’s periphery is about light years Construct a problem in which you determine the
from its center. (a) What should the orbital period orbital speed for a satellite near Eros. You will
of that star be? (b) If its period is years need to find the mass of the asteroid and consider
instead, what is the mass of the galaxy? Such such things as a safe distance for the orbit.
calculations are used to imply the existence of Although Eros is not spherical, calculate the
“dark matter” in the universe and have indicated, acceleration due to gravity on its surface at a point
for example, the existence of very massive black an average distance from its center of mass. Your
holes at the centers of some galaxies. instructor may also wish to have you calculate the
48. Integrated Concepts escape velocity from this point on Eros.
Space debris left from old satellites and their 51. Critical ThinkingA car travels around a loop with
launchers is becoming a hazard to other satellites. negligible friction at a constant speed and never
(a) Calculate the speed of a satellite in an orbit loses contact with the loop. The top of the loop is
900 km above Earth’s surface. (b) Suppose a loose labeled A and the bottom of the loop is labeled B.
rivet is in an orbit of the same radius that (a) At what point would the normal force be
intersects the satellite’s orbit at an angle of greatest? Briefly explain your reasoning. (b) Based
relative to Earth. What is the velocity of the rivet on experimental data, an equation that fits the
relative to the satellite just before striking it? (c) data is suggested for the normal force,FN, which
Given the rivet is 3.00 mm in size, how long will its may not be correct: , whereKis a
collision with the satellite last? (d) If its mass is constant with appropriate units andris the radius
0.500 g, what is the average force it exerts on the of the loop. Is this equation consistent with your
satellite? (e) How much energy in joules is answer from part a? Explain why or why not. Does
generated by the collision? (The satellite’s velocity this equation make sense? Explain why or why
does not change appreciably, because its mass is not. (c) Now the car travels around loops of
much greater than the rivet’s.) various radii and the speed at which the car barely
makes it around the loop is measured. Graph that
speed vs. the radius of the loop.
PAGE: 286
268 6 • Problems & Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 287
CHAPTER 7
Work, Energy, and Energy Resources
FIGURE7.1How many forms of energy can you identify in this photograph of a wind farm in Iowa? (credit: Jürgen from Sandesneben,
Germany, Wikimedia Commons)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
7.1Work: The Scientific Definition
7.2Kinetic Energy and the Work-Energy Theorem
7.3Gravitational Potential Energy
7.4Conservative Forces and Potential Energy
7.5Nonconservative Forces
7.6Conservation of Energy
7.7Power
7.8Work, Energy, and Power in Humans
7.9World Energy Use
INTRODUCTION TO WORK, ENERGY, AND ENERGY RESOURCES Energyplays an essential role both in everyday
events and in scientific phenomena. You can no doubt name many forms of energy, from that provided by our foods,
to the energy we use to run our cars, to the sunlight that warms us on the beach. You can also cite examples of what
people call energy that may not be scientific, such as someone having an energetic personality. Not only does
energy have many interesting forms, it is involved in almost all phenomena, and is one of the most important
concepts of physics. What makes it even more important is that the total amount of energy in the universe is
constant. Energy can change forms, but it cannot appear from nothing or disappear without a trace. Energy is thus
one of a handful of physical quantities that we say isconserved.
Conservation of energy(as physicists like to call the principle that energy can neither be created nor destroyed) is
based on experiment. For example, scientists Willem ’s Gravesande and Émilie du Châtelet undertook (separate)
experiments where they dropped heavy lead balls into beds of clay. Du Châtelet showed that the balls that hit the
clay with twice the velocity penetrated four times as deep into the clay; those with three times the velocity reached
a depth nine times greater. This led her to develop a more accurate concept of energy conservation, expressed as
. Even as scientists discovered new forms of energy, conservation of energy has always been found to
apply. Perhaps the most dramatic example of this was supplied by Einstein when he suggested that mass is
equivalent to energy (his famous equation ).
From a societal viewpoint, energy is one of the major building blocks of modern civilization. Energy resources are
PAGE: 288
270 7 • Work, Energy, and Energy Resources
key limiting factors to economic growth. The world use of energy resources, especially oil, continues to grow, with
ominous consequences economically, socially, politically, and environmentally. We will briefly examine the world’s
energy use patterns at the end of this chapter.
There is no simple, yet accurate, scientific definition for energy. Energy is characterized by its many forms and the
fact that it is conserved. We can loosely defineenergyas the ability to do work, admitting that in some
circumstances not all energy is available to do work. Because of the association of energy with work, we begin the
chapter with a discussion of work. Work is intimately related to energy and how energy moves from one system to
another or changes form.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/7-introduction-to-work-energy-and-
energy-resources)
7.1 Work: The Scientific Definition
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain how an object must be displaced for a force on it to do work.
• Explain how relative directions of force and displacement determine whether the work done is positive,
negative, or zero.
What It Means to Do Work
The scientific definition of work differs in some ways from its everyday meaning. Certain things we think of as hard
work, such as writing an exam or carrying a heavy load on level ground, are not work as defined by a scientist. The
scientific definition of work reveals its relationship to energy—whenever work is done, energy is transferred.
For work, in the scientific sense, to be done, a force must be exerted and there must be displacement in the
direction of the force.
Formally, theworkdone on a system by a constant force is defined to bethe product of the component of the force
in the direction of motion times the distance through which the force acts. For one-way motion in one dimension,
this is expressed in equation form as
7.1
where is work, is the displacement of the system, and is the angle between the force vector and the
displacement vector , as inFigure 7.2. We can also write this as
7.2
To find the work done on a system that undergoes motion that is not one-way or that is in two or three dimensions,
we divide the motion into one-way one-dimensional segments and add up the work done over each segment.
What is Work?
The work done on a system by a constant force isthe product of the component of the force in the direction of
motion times the distance through which the force acts. For one-way motion in one dimension, this is expressed
in equation form as
7.3
where is work, is the magnitude of the force on the system, is the magnitude of the displacement of the
system, and is the angle between the force vector and the displacement vector .
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 289
7.1 • Work: The Scientific Definition 271
FIGURE7.2Examples of work. (a) The work done by the force on this lawn mower is . Note that is the component of the
force in the direction of motion. (b) A person holding a briefcase does no work on it, because there is no displacement. No energy is
transferred to or from the briefcase. (c) The person moving the briefcase horizontally at a constant speed does no work on it, and transfers
no energy to it. (d) Workisdone on the briefcase by carrying it up stairs at constant speed, because there is necessarily a component of
force in the direction of the motion. Energy is transferred to the briefcase and could in turn be used to do work. (e) When the briefcase is
lowered, energy is transferred out of the briefcase and into an electric generator. Here the work done on the briefcase by the generator is
negative, removing energy from the briefcase, because and are in opposite directions.
To examine what the definition of work means, let us consider the other situations shown inFigure 7.2. The person
holding the briefcase inFigure 7.2(b) does no work, for example. Here , so . Why is it you get tired just
holding a load? The answer is that your muscles are doing work against one another,but they are doing no work on
the system of interest(the “briefcase-Earth system”—seeGravitational Potential Energyfor more details). There
must be displacement for work to be done, and there must be a component of the force in the direction of the
PAGE: 290
272 7 • Work, Energy, and Energy Resources
motion. For example, the person carrying the briefcase on level ground inFigure 7.2(c) does no work on it, because
the force is perpendicular to the motion. That is, , and so .
In contrast, when a force exerted on the system has a component in the direction of motion, such as inFigure 7.2(d),
workisdone—energy is transferred to the briefcase. Finally, inFigure 7.2(e), energy is transferred from the briefcase
to a generator. There are two good ways to interpret this energy transfer. One interpretation is that the briefcase’s
weight does work on the generator, giving it energy. The other interpretation is that the generator does negative
work on the briefcase, thus removing energy from it. The drawing shows the latter, with the force from the generator
upward on the briefcase, and the displacement downward. This makes , and ; therefore,
is negative.
Calculating Work
Work and energy have the same units. From the definition of work, we see that those units are force times distance.
Thus, in SI units, work and energy are measured innewton-meters. A newton-meter is given the special namejoule
(J), and . One joule is not a large amount of energy; it would lift a small 100-gram
apple a distance of about 1 meter.
EXAMPLE 7.1
Calculating the Work You Do to Push a Lawn Mower Across a Large Lawn
How much work is done on the lawn mower by the person inFigure 7.2(a) if he exerts a constant force of at
an angle below the horizontal and pushes the mower on level ground? Convert the amount of work from
joules to kilocalories and compare it with this person’s average daily intake of (about ) of food
energy. Onecalorie(1 cal) of heat is the amount required to warm 1 g of water by , and is equivalent to ,
while onefood calorie(1 kcal) is equivalent to .
Strategy
We can solve this problem by substituting the given values into the definition of work done on a system, stated in the
equation . The force, angle, and displacement are given, so that only the work is unknown.
Solution
The equation for the work is
7.4
Substituting the known values gives
7.5
Converting the work in joules to kilocalories yields . The ratio of the work
done to the daily consumption is
7.6
Discussion
This ratio is a tiny fraction of what the person consumes, but it is typical. Very little of the energy released in the
consumption of food is used to do work. Even when we “work” all day long, less than 10% of our food energy intake
is used to do work and more than 90% is converted to thermal energy or stored as chemical energy in fat.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 291
7.2 • Kinetic Energy and the Work-Energy Theorem 273
7.2 Kinetic Energy and the Work-Energy Theorem
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain work as a transfer of energy and net work as the work done by the net force.
• Explain and apply the work-energy theorem.
Work Transfers Energy
What happens to the work done on a system? Energy is transferred into the system, but in what form? Does it
remain in the system or move on? The answers depend on the situation. For example, if the lawn mower inFigure
7.2(a) is pushed just hard enough to keep it going at a constant speed, then energy put into the mower by the person
is removed continuously by friction, and eventually leaves the system in the form of heat transfer. In contrast, work
done on the briefcase by the person carrying it up stairs inFigure 7.2(d) is stored in the briefcase-Earth system and
can be recovered at any time, as shown inFigure 7.2(e). In fact, the building of the pyramids in ancient Egypt is an
example of storing energy in a system by doing work on the system. Some of the energy imparted to the stone
blocks in lifting them during construction of the pyramids remains in the stone-Earth system and has the potential to
do work.
In this section we begin the study of various types of work and forms of energy. We will find that some types of work
leave the energy of a system constant, for example, whereas others change the system in some way, such as making
it move. We will also develop definitions of important forms of energy, such as the energy of motion.
Net Work and the Work-Energy Theorem
We know from the study of Newton’s laws inDynamics: Force and Newton's Laws of Motionthat net force causes
acceleration. We will see in this section that work done by the net force gives a system energy of motion, and in the
process we will also find an expression for the energy of motion.
Let us start by considering the total, or net, work done on a system. Net work is defined to be the sum of work on an
object. The net work can be written in terms of the net force on an object. . In equation form, this is
where is the angle between the force vector and the displacement vector.
Figure 7.3(a) shows a graph of force versus displacement for the component of the force in the direction of the
displacement—that is, an vs. graph. In this case, is constant. You can see that the area under the
graph is , or the work done.Figure 7.3(b) shows a more general process where the force varies. The area
under the curve is divided into strips, each having an average force . The work done is
for each strip, and the total work done is the sum of the . Thus the total work done is the total
area under the curve, a useful property to which we shall refer later.
PAGE: 292
274 7 • Work, Energy, and Energy Resources
FIGURE7.3(a) A graph of vs. , when is constant. The area under the curve represents the work done by the force. (b) A
graph of vs. in which the force varies. The work done for each interval is the area of each strip; thus, the total area under the
curve equals the total work done.
Net work will be simpler to examine if we consider a one-dimensional situation where a force is used to accelerate
an object in a direction parallel to its initial velocity. Such a situation occurs for the package on the roller belt
conveyor system shown inFigure 7.4.
FIGURE7.4A package on a roller belt is pushed horizontally through a distance .
The force of gravity and the normal force acting on the package are perpendicular to the displacement and do no
work. Moreover, they are also equal in magnitude and opposite in direction so they cancel in calculating the net
force. The net force arises solely from the horizontal applied force and the horizontal friction force . Thus, as
expected, the net force is parallel to the displacement, so that and , and the net work is given by
7.7
The effect of the net force is to accelerate the package from to . The kinetic energy of the package
increases, indicating that the net work done on the system is positive. (SeeExample 7.2.) By using Newton’s second
law, and doing some algebra, we can reach an interesting conclusion. Substituting from Newton’s second
law gives
7.8
To get a relationship between net work and the speed given to a system by the net force acting on it, we take
and use the equation studied inMotion Equations for Constant Acceleration in One Dimensionfor the
change in speed over a distance if the acceleration has the constant value ; namely, (note that
appears in the expression for the net work). Solving for acceleration gives . When is substituted into
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 293
7.2 • Kinetic Energy and the Work-Energy Theorem 275
the preceding expression for , we obtain
7.9
The cancels, and we rearrange this to obtain
7.10
This expression is called thework-energy theorem, and it actually appliesin general(even for forces that vary in
direction and magnitude), although we have derived it for the special case of a constant force parallel to the
displacement. The theorem implies that the net work on a system equals the change in the quantity . This
quantity is our first example of a form of energy.
The Work-Energy Theorem
The net work on a system equals the change in the quantity .
7.11
The quantity in the work-energy theorem is defined to be the translationalkinetic energy(KE) of a mass
moving at a speed . (Translationalkinetic energy is distinct fromrotationalkinetic energy, which is considered
later.) In equation form, the translational kinetic energy,
7.12
is the energy associated with translational motion. Kinetic energy is a form of energy associated with the motion of a
particle, single body, or system of objects moving together.
We are aware that it takes energy to get an object, like a car or the package inFigure 7.4, up to speed, but it may be
a bit surprising that kinetic energy is proportional to speed squared. This proportionality means, for example, that a
car traveling at 100 km/h has four times the kinetic energy it has at 50 km/h, helping to explain why high-speed
collisions are so devastating. We will now consider a series of examples to illustrate various aspects of work and
energy.
EXAMPLE 7.2
Calculating the Kinetic Energy of a Package
Suppose a 30.0-kg package on the roller belt conveyor system inFigure 7.4is moving at 0.500 m/s. What is its
kinetic energy?
Strategy
Because the mass and speed are given, the kinetic energy can be calculated from its definition as given in the
equation .
Solution
The kinetic energy is given by
7.13
Entering known values gives
7.14
PAGE: 294
276 7 • Work, Energy, and Energy Resources
which yields
7.15
Discussion
Note that the unit of kinetic energy is the joule, the same as the unit of work, as mentioned when work was first
defined. It is also interesting that, although this is a fairly massive package, its kinetic energy is not large at this
relatively low speed. This fact is consistent with the observation that people can move packages like this without
exhausting themselves.
EXAMPLE 7.3
Determining the Work to Accelerate a Package
Suppose that you push on the 30.0-kg package inFigure 7.4with a constant force of 120 N through a distance of
0.800 m, and that the opposing friction force averages 5.00 N.
(a) Calculate the net work done on the package. (b) Solve the same problem as in part (a), this time by finding the
work done by each force that contributes to the net force.
Strategy and Concept for (a)
This is a motion in one dimension problem, because the downward force (from the weight of the package) and the
normal force have equal magnitude and opposite direction, so that they cancel in calculating the net force, while the
applied force, friction, and the displacement are all horizontal. (SeeFigure 7.4.) As expected, the net work is the net
force times distance.
Solution for (a)
The net force is the push force minus friction, or . Thus the net work is
7.16
Discussion for (a)
This value is the net work done on the package. The person actually does more work than this, because friction
opposes the motion. Friction does negative work and removes some of the energy the person expends and converts
it to thermal energy. The net work equals the sum of the work done by each individual force.
Strategy and Concept for (b)
The forces acting on the package are gravity, the normal force, the force of friction, and the applied force. The
normal force and force of gravity are each perpendicular to the displacement, and therefore do no work.
Solution for (b)
The applied force does work.
7.17
The friction force and displacement are in opposite directions, so that , and the work done by friction is
7.18
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 295
7.2 • Kinetic Energy and the Work-Energy Theorem 277
So the amounts of work done by gravity, by the normal force, by the applied force, and by friction are, respectively,
7.19
The total work done as the sum of the work done by each force is then seen to be
7.20
Discussion for (b)
The calculated total work as the sum of the work by each force agrees, as expected, with the work done
by the net force. The work done by a collection of forces acting on an object can be calculated by either approach.
EXAMPLE 7.4
Determining Speed from Work and Energy
Find the speed of the package inFigure 7.4at the end of the push, using work and energy concepts.
Strategy
Here the work-energy theorem can be used, because we have just calculated the net work, , and the initial
kinetic energy, . These calculations allow us to find the final kinetic energy, , and thus the final speed
.
Solution
The work-energy theorem in equation form is
7.21
Solving for gives
7.22
Thus,
7.23
Solving for the final speed as requested and entering known values gives
7.24
Discussion
Using work and energy, we not only arrive at an answer, we see that the final kinetic energy is the sum of the initial
kinetic energy and the net work done on the package. This means that the work indeed adds to the energy of the
package.
PAGE: 296
278 7 • Work, Energy, and Energy Resources
EXAMPLE 7.5
Work and Energy Can Reveal Distance, Too
How far does the package inFigure 7.4coast after the push, assuming friction remains constant? Use work and
energy considerations.
Strategy
We know that once the person stops pushing, friction will bring the package to rest. In terms of energy, friction does
negative work until it has removed all of the package’s kinetic energy. The work done by friction is the force of
friction times the distance traveled times the cosine of the angle between the friction force and displacement;
hence, this gives us a way of finding the distance traveled after the person stops pushing.
Solution
The normal force and force of gravity cancel in calculating the net force. The horizontal friction force is then the net
force, and it acts opposite to the displacement, so . To reduce the kinetic energy of the package to zero, the
work by friction must be minus the kinetic energy that the package started with plus what the package
accumulated due to the pushing. Thus . Furthermore, , where is the
distance it takes to stop. Thus,
7.25
and so
7.26
Discussion
This is a reasonable distance for a package to coast on a relatively friction-free conveyor system. Note that the work
done by friction is negative (the force is in the opposite direction of motion), so it removes the kinetic energy.
Some of the examples in this section can be solved without considering energy, but at the expense of missing out on
gaining insights about what work and energy are doing in this situation. On the whole, solutions involving energy are
generally shorter and easier than those using kinematics and dynamics alone.
7.3 Gravitational Potential Energy
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain gravitational potential energy in terms of work done against gravity.
• Show that the gravitational potential energy of an object of mass at height on Earth is given by
.
• Show how knowledge of the potential energy as a function of position can be used to simplify calculations
and explain physical phenomena.
Work Done Against Gravity
Climbing stairs and lifting objects is work in both the scientific and everyday sense—it is work done against the
gravitational force. When there is work, there is a transformation of energy. The work done against the gravitational
force goes into an important form of stored energy that we will explore in this section.
Let us calculate the work done in lifting an object of mass through a height , such as inFigure 7.5. If the object is
lifted straight up at constant speed, then the force needed to lift it is equal to its weight . The work done on the
mass is then . We define this to be thegravitational potential energy put into (or gained by)
the object-Earth system. This energy is associated with the state of separation between two objects that attract
each other by the gravitational force. For convenience, we refer to this as the gained by the object, recognizing
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 297
7.3 • Gravitational Potential Energy 279
that this is energy stored in the gravitational field of Earth. Why do we use the word “system”? Potential energy is a
property of a system rather than of a single object—due to its physical position. An object’s gravitational potential is
due to its position relative to the surroundings within the Earth-object system. The force applied to the object is an
external force, from outside the system. When it does positive work it increases the gravitational potential energy of
the system. Because gravitational potential energy depends on relative position, we need a reference level at which
to set the potential energy equal to 0. We usually choose this point to be Earth’s surface, but this point is arbitrary;
what is important is thedifferencein gravitational potential energy, because this difference is what relates to the
work done. The difference in gravitational potential energy of an object (in the Earth-object system) between two
rungs of a ladder will be the same for the first two rungs as for the last two rungs.
Converting Between Potential Energy and Kinetic Energy
Gravitational potential energy may be converted to other forms of energy, such as kinetic energy. If we release the
mass, gravitational force will do an amount of work equal to on it, thereby increasing its kinetic energy by that
same amount (by the work-energy theorem). We will find it more useful to consider just the conversion of to
without explicitly considering the intermediate step of work. (SeeExample 7.7.) This shortcut makes it is easier to
solve problems using energy (if possible) rather than explicitly using forces.
FIGURE7.5(a) The work done to lift the weight is stored in the mass-Earth system as gravitational potential energy. (b) As the weight
moves downward, this gravitational potential energy is transferred to the cuckoo clock.
More precisely, we define thechangein gravitational potential energy to be
7.27
where, for simplicity, we denote the change in height by rather than the usual . Note that is positive when the
final height is greater than the initial height, and vice versa. For example, if a 0.500-kg mass hung from a cuckoo
clock is raised 1.00 m, then its change in gravitational potential energy is
7.28
Note that the units of gravitational potential energy turn out to be joules, the same as for work and other forms of
energy. As the clock runs, the mass is lowered. We can think of the mass as gradually giving up its 4.90 J of
PAGE: 298
280 7 • Work, Energy, and Energy Resources
gravitational potential energy,without directly considering the force of gravity that does the work.
Using Potential Energy to Simplify Calculations
The equation applies for any path that has a change in height of , not just when the mass is lifted
straight up. (SeeFigure 7.6.) It is much easier to calculate (a simple multiplication) than it is to calculate the
work done along a complicated path. The idea of gravitational potential energy has the double advantage that it is
very broadly applicable and it makes calculations easier. From now on, we will consider that any change in vertical
position of a mass is accompanied by a change in gravitational potential energy , and we will avoid the
equivalent but more difficult task of calculating work done by or against the gravitational force.
FIGURE7.6The change in gravitational potential energy between points A and B is independent of the path. for any
path between the two points. Gravity is one of a small class of forces where the work done by or against the force depends only on the
starting and ending points, not on the path between them.
EXAMPLE 7.6
The Force to Stop Falling
A 60.0-kg person jumps onto the floor from a height of 3.00 m. If he lands stiffly (with his knee joints compressing
by 0.500 cm), calculate the force on the knee joints.
Strategy
This person’s energy is brought to zero in this situation by the work done on him by the floor as he stops. The initial
is transformed into as he falls. The work done by the floor reduces this kinetic energy to zero.
Solution
The work done on the person by the floor as he stops is given by
7.29
with a minus sign because the displacement while stopping and the force from floor are in opposite directions
. The floor removes energy from the system, so it does negative work.
The kinetic energy the person has upon reaching the floor is the amount of potential energy lost by falling through
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 299
7.3 • Gravitational Potential Energy 281
height :
7.30
The distance that the person’s knees bend is much smaller than the height of the fall, so the additional change in
gravitational potential energy during the knee bend is ignored.
The work done by the floor on the person stops the person and brings the person’s kinetic energy to zero:
7.31
Combining this equation with the expression for gives
7.32
Recalling that is negative because the person felldown, the force on the knee joints is given by
7.33
Discussion
Such a large force (500 times more than the person’s weight) over the short impact time is enough to break bones. A
much better way to cushion the shock is by bending the legs or rolling on the ground, increasing the time over which
the force acts. A bending motion of 0.5 m this way yields a force 100 times smaller than in the example. A
kangaroo's hopping shows this method in action. The kangaroo is the only large animal to use hopping for
locomotion, but the shock in hopping is cushioned by the bending of its hind legs in each jump.(SeeFigure 7.7.)
FIGURE7.7The work done by the ground upon the kangaroo reduces its kinetic energy to zero as it lands. However, by applying the force of
the ground on the hind legs over a longer distance, the impact on the bones is reduced. (credit: Chris Samuel, Flickr)
EXAMPLE 7.7
Finding the Speed of a Roller Coaster from its Height
(a) What is the final speed of the roller coaster shown inFigure 7.8if it starts from rest at the top of the 20.0 m hill
and work done by frictional forces is negligible? (b) What is its final speed (again assuming negligible friction) if its
initial speed is 5.00 m/s?
PAGE: 300
282 7 • Work, Energy, and Energy Resources
FIGURE7.8The speed of a roller coaster increases as gravity pulls it downhill and is greatest at its lowest point. Viewed in terms of energy,
the roller-coaster-Earth system’s gravitational potential energy is converted to kinetic energy. If work done by friction is negligible, all
is converted to .
Strategy
The roller coaster loses potential energy as it goes downhill. We neglect friction, so that the remaining force exerted
by the track is the normal force, which is perpendicular to the direction of motion and does no work. The net work on
the roller coaster is then done by gravity alone. Thelossof gravitational potential energy from movingdownward
through a distance equals thegainin kinetic energy. This can be written in equation form as .
Using the equations for and , we can solve for the final speed , which is the desired quantity.
Solution for (a)
Here the initial kinetic energy is zero, so that . The equation for change in potential energy states that
. Since is negative in this case, we will rewrite this as to show the minus sign
clearly. Thus,
7.34
becomes
7.35
Solving for , we find that mass cancels and that
7.36
Substituting known values,
7.37
Solution for (b)
Again . In this case there is initial kinetic energy, so . Thus,
7.38
Rearranging gives
7.39
This means that the final kinetic energy is the sum of the initial kinetic energy and the gravitational potential energy.
Mass again cancels, and
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 301
7.3 • Gravitational Potential Energy 283
7.40
This equation is very similar to the kinematics equation , but it is more general—the kinematics
equation is valid only for constant acceleration, whereas our equation above is valid for any path regardless of
whether the object moves with a constant acceleration. Now, substituting known values gives
7.41
Discussion and Implications
First, note that mass cancels. This is quite consistent with observations made inFalling Objectsthat all objects fall
at the same rate if friction is negligible. Second, only the speed of the roller coaster is considered; there is no
information about its direction at any point. This reveals another general truth. When friction is negligible, the speed
of a falling body depends only on its initial speed and height, and not on its mass or the path taken. For example, the
roller coaster will have the same final speed whether it falls 20.0 m straight down or takes a more complicated path
like the one in the figure. Third, and perhaps unexpectedly, the final speed in part (b) is greater than in part (a), but
by far less than 5.00 m/s. Finally, note that speed can be found atanyheight along the way by simply using the
appropriate value of at the point of interest.
We have seen that work done by or against the gravitational force depends only on the starting and ending points,
and not on the path between, allowing us to define the simplifying concept of gravitational potential energy. We can
do the same thing for a few other forces, and we will see that this leads to a formal definition of the law of
conservation of energy.
Making Connections: Take-Home Investigation—Converting Potential to Kinetic
Energy
One can study the conversion of gravitational potential energy into kinetic energy in this experiment. On a
smooth, level surface, use a ruler of the kind that has a groove running along its length and a book to make an
incline (seeFigure 7.9). Place a marble at the 10-cm position on the ruler and let it roll down the ruler. When it
hits the level surface, measure the time it takes to roll one meter. Now place the marble at the 20-cm and the
30-cm positions and again measure the times it takes to roll 1 m on the level surface. Find the velocity of the
marble on the level surface for all three positions. Plot velocity squared versus the distance traveled by the
marble. What is the shape of each plot? If the shape is a straight line, the plot shows that the marble’s kinetic
energy at the bottom is proportional to its potential energy at the release point.
FIGURE7.9A marble rolls down a ruler, and its speed on the level surface is measured.
PAGE: 302
284 7 • Work, Energy, and Energy Resources
7.4 Conservative Forces and Potential Energy
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define conservative force, potential energy, and mechanical energy.
• Explain the potential energy of a spring in terms of its compression when Hooke’s law applies.
• Use the work-energy theorem to show how having only conservative forces implies conservation of
mechanical energy.
Potential Energy and Conservative Forces
Work is done by a force, and some forces, such as weight, have special characteristics. Aconservative forceis one,
like the gravitational force, for which work done by or against it depends only on the starting and ending points of a
motion and not on the path taken. We can define apotential energy for any conservative force, just as we did
for the gravitational force. For example, when you wind up a toy, an egg timer, or an old-fashioned watch, you do
work against its spring and store energy in it. (We treat these springs as ideal, in that we assume there is no friction
and no production of thermal energy.) This stored energy is recoverable as work, and it is useful to think of it as
potential energy contained in the spring. Indeed, the reason that the spring has this characteristic is that its force is
conservative. That is, a conservative force results in stored or potential energy. Gravitational potential energy is one
example, as is the energy stored in a spring. We will also see how conservative forces are related to the conservation
of energy.
Potential Energy and Conservative Forces
Potential energy is the energy a system has due to position, shape, or configuration. It is stored energy that is
completely recoverable.
A conservative force is one for which work done by or against it depends only on the starting and ending points
of a motion and not on the path taken.
We can define a potential energy for any conservative force. The work done against a conservative force to
reach a final configuration depends on the configuration, not the path followed, and is the potential energy
added.
Potential Energy of a Spring
First, let us obtain an expression for the potential energy stored in a spring ( ). We calculate the work done to
stretch or compress a spring that obeys Hooke’s law. (Hooke’s law was examined inElasticity: Stress and Strain, and
states that the magnitude of force on the spring and the resulting deformation are proportional, .)
(SeeFigure 7.10.) For our spring, we will replace (the amount of deformation produced by a force ) by the
distance that the spring is stretched or compressed along its length. So the force needed to stretch the spring has
magnitude , where is the spring’s force constant. The force increases linearly from 0 at the start to in
the fully stretched position. The average force is . Thus the work done in stretching or compressing the spring is
. Alternatively, we noted inKinetic Energy and the Work-Energy Theoremthat the area
under a graph of vs. is the work done by the force. InFigure 7.10(c) we see that this area is also . We
therefore define thepotential energy of a spring, , to be
7.42
where is the spring’s force constant and is the displacement from its undeformed position. The potential energy
represents the work doneonthe spring and the energy stored in it as a result of stretching or compressing it a
distance . The potential energy of the spring does not depend on the path taken; it depends only on the
stretch or squeeze in the final configuration.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 303
7.4 • Conservative Forces and Potential Energy 285
FIGURE7.10(a) An undeformed spring has no stored in it. (b) The force needed to stretch (or compress) the spring a distance has a
magnitude , and the work done to stretch (or compress) it is . Because the force is conservative, this work is stored as
potential energy in the spring, and it can be fully recovered. (c) A graph of vs. has a slope of , and the area under the graph is
. Thus the work done or potential energy stored is .
The equation has general validity beyond the special case for which it was derived. Potential energy
can be stored in any elastic medium by deforming it. Indeed, the general definition ofpotential energyis energy
due to position, shape, or configuration. For shape or position deformations, stored energy is , where
is the force constant of the particular system and is its deformation. Another example is seen inFigure 7.11for a
guitar string.
FIGURE7.11Work is done to deform the guitar string, giving it potential energy. When released, the potential energy is converted to kinetic
energy and back to potential as the string oscillates back and forth. A very small fraction is dissipated as sound energy, slowly removing
energy from the string.
Conservation of Mechanical Energy
Let us now consider what form the work-energy theorem takes when only conservative forces are involved. This will
lead us to the conservation of energy principle. The work-energy theorem states that the net work done by all forces
acting on a system equals its change in kinetic energy. In equation form, this is
7.43
If only conservative forces act, then
7.44
PAGE: 304
286 7 • Work, Energy, and Energy Resources
where is the total work done by all conservative forces. Thus,
7.45
Now, if the conservative force, such as the gravitational force or a spring force, does work, the system loses
potential energy. That is, . Therefore,
7.46
or
7.47
This equation means that the total kinetic and potential energy is constant for any process involving only
conservative forces. That is,
7.48
where i and f denote initial and final values. This equation is a form of the work-energy theorem for conservative
forces; it is known as theconservation of mechanical energyprinciple. Remember that this applies to the extent
that all the forces are conservative, so that friction is negligible. The total kinetic plus potential energy of a system is
defined to be itsmechanical energy, . In a system that experiences only conservative forces, there is a
potential energy associated with each force, and the energy only changes form between and the various types of
, with the total energy remaining constant.
EXAMPLE 7.8
Using Conservation of Mechanical Energy to Calculate the Speed of a Toy Car
A 0.100-kg toy car is propelled by a compressed spring, as shown inFigure 7.12. The car follows a track that rises
0.180 m above the starting point. The spring is compressed 4.00 cm and has a force constant of 250.0 N/m.
Assuming work done by friction to be negligible, find (a) how fast the car is going before it starts up the slope and (b)
how fast it is going at the top of the slope.
FIGURE7.12A toy car is pushed by a compressed spring and coasts up a slope. Assuming negligible friction, the potential energy in the
spring is first completely converted to kinetic energy, and then to a combination of kinetic and gravitational potential energy as the car rises.
The details of the path are unimportant because all forces are conservative—the car would have the same final speed if it took the alternate
path shown.
Strategy
The spring force and the gravitational force are conservative forces, so conservation of mechanical energy can be
used. Thus,
7.49
or
7.50
where is the height (vertical position) and is the compression of the spring. This general statement looks
complex but becomes much simpler when we start considering specific situations. First, we must identify the initial
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 305
7.4 • Conservative Forces and Potential Energy 287
and final conditions in a problem; then, we enter them into the last equation to solve for an unknown.
Solution for (a)
This part of the problem is limited to conditions just before the car is released and just after it leaves the spring.
Take the initial height to be zero, so that both and are zero. Furthermore, the initial speed is zero and the
final compression of the spring is zero, and so several terms in the conservation of mechanical energy equation
are zero and it simplifies to
7.51
In other words, the initial potential energy in the spring is converted completely to kinetic energy in the absence of
friction. Solving for the final speed and entering known values yields
7.52
Solution for (b)
One method of finding the speed at the top of the slope is to consider conditions just before the car is released and
just after it reaches the top of the slope, completely ignoring everything in between. Doing the same type of analysis
to find which terms are zero, the conservation of mechanical energy becomes
7.53
This form of the equation means that the spring’s initial potential energy is converted partly to gravitational potential
energy and partly to kinetic energy. The final speed at the top of the slope will be less than at the bottom. Solving for
and substituting known values gives
7.54
Discussion
Another way to solve this problem is to realize that the car’s kinetic energy before it goes up the slope is converted
partly to potential energy—that is, to take the final conditions in part (a) to be the initial conditions in part (b).
Note that, for conservative forces, we do not directly calculate the work they do; rather, we consider their effects
through their corresponding potential energies, just as we did inExample 7.8. Note also that we do not consider
details of the path taken—only the starting and ending points are important (as long as the path is not impossible).
This assumption is usually a tremendous simplification, because the path may be complicated and forces may vary
along the way.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Energy Skate Park
Learn about conservation of energy with a skater dude! Build tracks, ramps and jumps for the skater and view the
kinetic energy, potential energy and friction as he moves. You can also take the skater to different planets or even
space!
PAGE: 306
288 7 • Work, Energy, and Energy Resources
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/7-4-conservative-forces-and-
potential-energy)
7.5 Nonconservative Forces
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define nonconservative forces and explain how they affect mechanical energy.
• Show how the principle of conservation of energy can be applied by treating the conservative forces in
terms of their potential energies and any nonconservative forces in terms of the work they do.
Nonconservative Forces and Friction
Forces are either conservative or nonconservative. Conservative forces were discussed inConservative Forces and
Potential Energy. Anonconservative forceis one for which work depends on the path taken. Friction is a good
example of a nonconservative force. As illustrated inFigure 7.13, work done against friction depends on the length
of the path between the starting and ending points. Because of this dependence on path, there is no potential
energy associated with nonconservative forces. An important characteristic is that the work done by a
nonconservative forceadds or removes mechanical energy from a system.Friction, for example, createsthermal
energythat dissipates, removing energy from the system. Furthermore, even if the thermal energy is retained or
captured, it cannot be fully converted back to work, so it is lost or not recoverable in that sense as well.
FIGURE7.13The amount of the happy face erased depends on the path taken by the eraser between points A and B, as does the work
done against friction. Less work is done and less of the face is erased for the path in (a) than for the path in (b). The force here is friction,
and most of the work goes into thermal energy that subsequently leaves the system (the happy face plus the eraser). The energy expended
cannot be fully recovered.
How Nonconservative Forces Affect Mechanical Energy
Mechanicalenergymaynot be conserved when nonconservative forces act. For example, when a car is brought to a
stop by friction on level ground, it loses kinetic energy, which is dissipated as thermal energy, reducing its
mechanical energy.Figure 7.14compares the effects of conservative and nonconservative forces. We often choose
to understand simpler systems such as that described inFigure 7.14(a) first before studying more complicated
systems as inFigure 7.14(b).
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 307
7.5 • Nonconservative Forces 289
FIGURE7.14Comparison of the effects of conservative and nonconservative forces on the mechanical energy of a system. (a) A system
with only conservative forces. When a rock is dropped onto a spring, its mechanical energy remains constant (neglecting air resistance)
because the force in the spring is conservative. The spring can propel the rock back to its original height, where it once again has only
potential energy due to gravity. (b) A system with nonconservative forces. When the same rock is dropped onto the ground, it is stopped by
nonconservative forces that dissipate its mechanical energy as thermal energy, sound, and surface distortion. The rock has lost mechanical
energy.
How the Work-Energy Theorem Applies
Now let us consider what form the work-energy theorem takes when both conservative and nonconservative forces
act. We will see that the work done by nonconservative forces equals the change in the mechanical energy of a
system. As noted inKinetic Energy and the Work-Energy Theorem, the work-energy theorem states that the net
work on a system equals the change in its kinetic energy, or . The net work is the sum of the work by
nonconservative forces plus the work by conservative forces. That is,
7.55
so that
7.56
where is the total work done by all nonconservative forces and is the total work done by all conservative
forces.
FIGURE7.15A person pushes a crate up a ramp, doing work on the crate. Friction and gravitational force (not shown) also do work on the
crate; both forces oppose the person’s push. As the crate is pushed up the ramp, it gains mechanical energy, implying that the work done by
the person is greater than the work done by friction.
ConsiderFigure 7.15, in which a person pushes a crate up a ramp and is opposed by friction. As in the previous
section, we note that work done by a conservative force comes from a loss of gravitational potential energy, so that
. Substituting this equation into the previous one and solving for gives
7.57
This equation means that the total mechanical energy changes by exactly the amount of work done by
nonconservative forces. InFigure 7.15, this is the work done by the person minus the work done by friction. So even
if energy is not conserved for the system of interest (such as the crate), we know that an equal amount of work was
done to cause the change in total mechanical energy.
PAGE: 308
290 7 • Work, Energy, and Energy Resources
We rearrange to obtain
7.58
This means that the amount of work done by nonconservative forces adds to the mechanical energy of a system. If
is positive, then mechanical energy is increased, such as when the person pushes the crate up the ramp in
Figure 7.15. If is negative, then mechanical energy is decreased, such as when the rock hits the ground in
Figure 7.14(b). If is zero, then mechanical energy is conserved, and nonconservative forces are balanced. For
example, when you push a lawn mower at constant speed on level ground, your work done is removed by the work
of friction, and the mower has a constant energy.
Applying Energy Conservation with Nonconservative Forces
When no change in potential energy occurs, applying amounts to applying the
work-energy theorem by setting the change in kinetic energy to be equal to the net work done on the system, which
in the most general case includes both conservative and nonconservative forces. But when seeking instead to find a
change in total mechanical energy in situations that involve changes in both potential and kinetic energy, the
previous equation says that you can start by finding the change in mechanical
energy that would have resulted from just the conservative forces, including the potential energy changes, and add
to it the work done, with the proper sign, by any nonconservative forces involved.
EXAMPLE 7.9
Calculating Distance Traveled: How Far a Baseball Player Slides
Consider the situation shown inFigure 7.16, where a baseball player slides to a stop on level ground. Using energy
considerations, calculate the distance the 65.0-kg baseball player slides, given that his initial speed is 6.00 m/s and
the force of friction against him is a constant 450 N.
FIGURE7.16The baseball player slides to a stop in a distance . In the process, friction removes the player’s kinetic energy by doing an
amount of work equal to the initial kinetic energy.
Strategy
Friction stops the player by converting his kinetic energy into other forms, including thermal energy. In terms of the
work-energy theorem, the work done by friction, which is negative, is added to the initial kinetic energy to reduce it
to zero. The work done by friction is negative, because is in the opposite direction of the motion (that is, ,
and so ). Thus . The equation simplifies to
7.59
or
7.60
This equation can now be solved for the distance .
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 309
7.5 • Nonconservative Forces 291
Solution
Solving the previous equation for and substituting known values yields
7.61
Discussion
The most important point of this example is that the amount of nonconservative work equals the change in
mechanical energy. For example, you must work harder to stop a truck, with its large mechanical energy, than to
stop a mosquito.
EXAMPLE 7.10
Calculating Distance Traveled: Sliding Up an Incline
Suppose that the player fromExample 7.9is running up a hill having a incline upward with a surface similar to
that in the baseball stadium. The player slides with the same initial speed, and the frictional force is still 450 N.
Determine how far he slides.
FIGURE7.17The same baseball player slides to a stop on a slope.
Strategy
In this case, the work done by the nonconservative friction force on the player reduces the mechanical energy he
has from his kinetic energy at zero height, to the final mechanical energy he has by moving through distance to
reach height along the hill, with . This is expressed by the equation
7.62
Solution
The work done by friction is again ; initially the potential energy is and the kinetic
energy is ; the final energy contributions are for the kinetic energy and
for the potential energy.
Substituting these values gives
7.63
Solve this for to obtain
PAGE: 310
292 7 • Work, Energy, and Energy Resources
7.64
Discussion
As might have been expected, the player slides a shorter distance by sliding uphill. Note that the problem could also
have been solved in terms of the forces directly and the work energy theorem, instead of using the potential energy.
This method would have required combining the normal force and force of gravity vectors, which no longer cancel
each other because they point in different directions, and friction, to find the net force. You could then use the net
force and the net work to find the distance that reduces the kinetic energy to zero. By applying conservation of
energy and using the potential energy instead, we need only consider the gravitational potential energy ,
without combining and resolving force vectors. This simplifies the solution considerably.
Making Connections: Take-Home Investigation—Determining Friction from the
Stopping Distance
This experiment involves the conversion of gravitational potential energy into thermal energy. Use the ruler,
book, and marble fromTake-Home Investigation—Converting Potential to Kinetic Energy. In addition, you will
need a foam cup with a small hole in the side, as shown inFigure 7.18. From the 10-cm position on the ruler, let
the marble roll into the cup positioned at the bottom of the ruler. Measure the distance the cup moves before
stopping. What forces caused it to stop? What happened to the kinetic energy of the marble at the bottom of the
ruler? Next, place the marble at the 20-cm and the 30-cm positions and again measure the distance the cup
moves after the marble enters it. Plot the distance the cup moves versus the initial marble position on the ruler.
Is this relationship linear?
With some simple assumptions, you can use these data to find the coefficient of kinetic friction of the cup on
the table. The force of friction on the cup is , where the normal force is just the weight of the cup plus
the marble. The normal force and force of gravity do no work because they are perpendicular to the
displacement of the cup, which moves horizontally. The work done by friction is . You will need the mass of
the marble as well to calculate its initial kinetic energy.
It is interesting to do the above experiment also with a steel marble (or ball bearing). Releasing it from the same
positions on the ruler as you did with the glass marble, is the velocity of this steel marble the same as the
velocity of the marble at the bottom of the ruler? Is the distance the cup moves proportional to the mass of the
steel and glass marbles?
FIGURE7.18Rolling a marble down a ruler into a foam cup.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 311
7.6 • Conservation of Energy 293
PHET EXPLORATIONS
The Ramp
Explore forces, energy and work as you push household objects up and down a ramp. Lower and raise the ramp to
see how the angle of inclination affects the parallel forces acting on the file cabinet. Graphs show forces, energy and
work.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/l/21ramp).
7.6 Conservation of Energy
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the law of the conservation of energy.
• Describe some of the many forms of energy.
• Define efficiency of an energy conversion process as the fraction left as useful energy or work, rather than
being transformed, for example, into thermal energy.
Law of Conservation of Energy
Energy, as we have noted, is conserved, making it one of the most important physical quantities in nature. Thelaw
of conservation of energycan be stated as follows:
Total energy is constant in any process. It may change in form or be transferred from one system to another, but the
total remains the same.
We have explored some forms of energy and some ways it can be transferred from one system to another. This
exploration led to the definition of two major types of energy—mechanical energy and energy transferred
via work done by nonconservative forces . But energy takesmanyother forms, manifesting itself inmany
different ways, and we need to be able to deal with all of these before we can write an equation for the above
general statement of the conservation of energy.
Other Forms of Energy than Mechanical Energy
At this point, we deal with all other forms of energy by lumping them into a single group called other energy ( ).
Then we can state the conservation of energy in equation form as
7.65
All types of energy and work can be included in this very general statement of conservation of energy. Kinetic energy
is , work done by a conservative force is represented by , work done by nonconservative forces is , and all
other energies are included as . This equation applies to all previous examples; in those situations was
constant, and so it subtracted out and was not directly considered.
Making Connections: Usefulness of the Energy Conservation Principle
The fact that energy is conserved and has many forms makes it very important. You will find that energy is
discussed in many contexts, because it is involved in all processes. It will also become apparent that many
situations are best understood in terms of energy and that problems are often most easily conceptualized and
solved by considering energy.
When does play a role? One example occurs when a person eats. Food is oxidized with the release of carbon
dioxide, water, and energy. Some of this chemical energy is converted to kinetic energy when the person moves, to
potential energy when the person changes altitude, and to thermal energy (another form of ).
PAGE: 312
294 7 • Work, Energy, and Energy Resources
Some of the Many Forms of Energy
What are some other forms of energy? You can probably name a number of forms of energy not yet discussed. Many
of these will be covered in later chapters, but let us detail a few here.Electrical energyis a common form that is
converted to many other forms and does work in a wide range of practical situations. Fuels, such as gasoline and
food, carrychemical energythat can be transferred to a system through oxidation. Chemical fuel can also produce
electrical energy, such as in batteries. Batteries can in turn produce light, which is a very pure form of energy. Most
energy sources on Earth are in fact stored energy from the energy we receive from the Sun. We sometimes refer to
this asradiant energy, or electromagnetic radiation, which includes visible light, infrared, and ultraviolet radiation.
Nuclear energycomes from processes that convert measurable amounts of mass into energy. Nuclear energy is
transformed into the energy of sunlight, into electrical energy in power plants, and into the energy of the heat
transfer and blast in weapons. Atoms and molecules inside all objects are in random motion. This internal
mechanical energy from the random motions is calledthermal energy, because it is related to the temperature of
the object. These and all other forms of energy can be converted into one another and can do work.
Table 7.1gives the amount of energy stored, used, or released from various objects and in various phenomena. The
range of energies and the variety of types and situations is impressive.
Problem-Solving Strategies for Energy
You will find the following problem-solving strategies useful whenever you deal with energy. The strategies help
in organizing and reinforcing energy concepts. In fact, they are used in the examples presented in this chapter.
The familiar general problem-solving strategies presented earlier—involving identifying physical principles,
knowns, and unknowns, checking units, and so on—continue to be relevant here.
Step 1.Determine the system of interest and identify what information is given and what quantity is to be
calculated. A sketch will help.
Step 2.Examine all the forces involved and determine whether you know or are given the potential energy from
the work done by the forces. Then use step 3 or step 4.
Step 3.If you know the potential energies for the forces that enter into the problem, then forces are all
conservative, and you can apply conservation of mechanical energy simply in terms of potential and kinetic
energy. The equation expressing conservation of energy is
7.66
Step 4.If you know the potential energy for only some of the forces, possibly because some of them are
nonconservative and do not have a potential energy, or if there are other energies that are not easily treated in
terms of force and work, then the conservation of energy law in its most general form must be used.
7.67
In most problems, one or more of the terms is zero, simplifying its solution. Do not calculate , the work done
by conservative forces; it is already incorporated in the terms.
Step 5.You have already identified the types of work and energy involved (in step 2). Before solving for the
unknown,eliminate terms wherever possibleto simplify the algebra. For example, choose at either the
initial or final point, so that is zero there. Then solve for the unknown in the customary manner.
Step 6.Check the answer to see if it is reasonable. Once you have solved a problem, reexamine the forms of
work and energy to see if you have set up the conservation of energy equation correctly. For example, work done
against friction should be negative, potential energy at the bottom of a hill should be less than that at the top,
and so on. Also check to see that the numerical value obtained is reasonable. For example, the final speed of a
skateboarder who coasts down a 3-m-high ramp could reasonably be 20 km/h, butnot80 km/h.
Transformation of Energy
The transformation of energy from one form into others is happening all the time. The chemical energy in food is
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 313
7.6 • Conservation of Energy 295
converted into thermal energy through metabolism; light energy is converted into chemical energy through
photosynthesis. In a larger example, the chemical energy contained in coal is converted into thermal energy as it
burns to turn water into steam in a boiler. This thermal energy in the steam in turn is converted to mechanical energy
as it spins a turbine, which is connected to a generator to produce electrical energy. (In all of these examples, not all
of the initial energy is converted into the forms mentioned. This important point is discussed later in this section.)
Another example of energy conversion occurs in a solar cell. Sunlight impinging on a solar cell (seeFigure 7.19)
produces electricity, which in turn can be used to run an electric motor. Energy is converted from the primary source
of solar energy into electrical energy and then into mechanical energy.
FIGURE7.19Solar energy is converted into electrical energy by solar cells, which is used to run a motor in this solar-power aircraft. (credit:
NASA)
Object/phenomenon Energy in joules
Big Bang
Energy released in a supernova
Fusion of all the hydrogen in Earth’s oceans
Annual world energy use ×
Large fusion bomb (9 megaton) ×
1 kg hydrogen (fusion to helium) ×
1 kg uranium (nuclear fission) ×
Hiroshima-size fission bomb (10 kiloton) ×
90,000-metric ton aircraft carrier at 30 knots ×
1 barrel crude oil ×
1 ton TNT ×
TABLE7.1Energy of Various Objects and Phenomena
PAGE: 314
296 7 • Work, Energy, and Energy Resources
Object/phenomenon Energy in joules
1 gallon of gasoline ×
Daily home electricity use (developed countries) ×
Daily adult food intake (recommended) ×
1000-kg car at 90 km/h ×
1 g fat (9.3 kcal) ×
ATP hydrolysis reaction ×
1 g carbohydrate (4.1 kcal) ×
1 g protein (4.1 kcal) ×
Tennis ball at 100 km/h
Mosquito ×
Single electron in a TV tube beam ×
Energy to break one DNA strand
TABLE7.1Energy of Various Objects and Phenomena
Efficiency
Even though energy is conserved in an energy conversion process, the output ofuseful energyor work will be less
than the energy input. Theefficiency of an energy conversion process is defined as
7.68
Table 7.2lists some efficiencies of mechanical devices and human activities. In a coal-fired power plant, for
example, about 40% of the chemical energy in the coal becomes useful electrical energy. The other 60% transforms
into other (perhaps less useful) energy forms, such as thermal energy, which is then released to the environment
through combustion gases and cooling towers.
Activity/device Efficiency (%)1
Cycling and climbing 20
Swimming, surface 2
TABLE7.2Efficiency of the Human Body and
Mechanical Devices
1 Representative values
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 315
7.7 • Power 297
Activity/device Efficiency (%)1
Swimming, submerged 4
Shoveling 3
Weightlifting 9
Steam engine 17
Gasoline engine 30
Diesel engine 35
Nuclear power plant 35
Coal power plant 42
Electric motor 98
Compact fluorescent light 20
Gas heater (residential) 90
Solar cell 10
TABLE7.2Efficiency of the Human Body and
Mechanical Devices
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Masses and Springs
A realistic mass and spring laboratory. Hang masses from springs and adjust the spring stiffness and damping. You
can even slow time. Transport the lab to different planets. A chart shows the kinetic, potential, and thermal energies
for each spring.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/7-6-conservation-of-energy)
7.7 Power
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Calculate power by calculating changes in energy over time.
• Examine power consumption and calculations of the cost of energy consumed.
What is Power?
Power—the word conjures up many images: a professional football player muscling aside his opponent, a dragster
roaring away from the starting line, a volcano blowing its lava into the atmosphere, or a rocket blasting off, as in
Figure 7.20.
PAGE: 316
298 7 • Work, Energy, and Energy Resources
FIGURE7.20This powerful rocket on the Space ShuttleEndeavordid work and consumed energy at a very high rate. (credit: NASA)
These images of power have in common the rapid performance of work, consistent with the scientific definition of
power( ) as the rate at which work is done.
Power
Power is the rate at which work is done.
7.69
The SI unit for power is thewatt( ), where 1 watt equals 1 joule/second
Because work is energy transfer, power is also the rate at which energy is expended. A 60-W light bulb, for example,
expends 60 J of energy per second. Great power means a large amount of work or energy developed in a short time.
For example, when a powerful car accelerates rapidly, it does a large amount of work and consumes a large amount
of fuel in a short time.
Calculating Power from Energy
EXAMPLE 7.11
Calculating the Power to Climb Stairs
What is the power output for a 60.0-kg woman who runs up a 3.00 m high flight of stairs in 3.50 s, starting from rest
but having a final speed of 2.00 m/s? (SeeFigure 7.21.)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 317
7.7 • Power 299
FIGURE7.21When this woman runs upstairs starting from rest, she converts the chemical energy originally from food into kinetic energy
and gravitational potential energy. Her power output depends on how fast she does this.
Strategy and Concept
The work going into mechanical energy is . At the bottom of the stairs, we take both and as
initially zero; thus, , where is the vertical height of the stairs. Because all terms
are given, we can calculate and then divide it by time to get power.
Solution
Substituting the expression for into the definition of power given in the previous equation, yields
7.70
Entering known values yields
7.71
Discussion
The woman does 1764 J of work to move up the stairs compared with only 120 J to increase her kinetic energy;
thus, most of her power output is required for climbing rather than accelerating.
It is impressive that this woman’s useful power output is slightly less than 1horsepower ! People
can generate more than a horsepower with their leg muscles for short periods of time by rapidly converting available
blood sugar and oxygen into work output. (A horse can put out 1 hp for hours on end.) Once oxygen is depleted,
power output decreases and the person begins to breathe rapidly to obtain oxygen to metabolize more food—this is
known as theaerobicstage of exercise. If the woman climbed the stairs slowly, then her power output would be
much less, although the amount of work done would be the same.
Making Connections: Take-Home Investigation—Measure Your Power Rating
Determine your own power rating by measuring the time it takes you to climb a flight of stairs. We will ignore the
gain in kinetic energy, as the above example showed that it was a small portion of the energy gain. Don’t expect
PAGE: 318
300 7 • Work, Energy, and Energy Resources
that your output will be more than about 0.5 hp.
Examples of Power
Examples of power are limited only by the imagination, because there are as many types as there are forms of work
and energy. (SeeTable 7.3for some examples.) Sunlight reaching Earth’s surface carries a maximum power of about
1.3 kilowatts per square meter A tiny fraction of this is retained by Earth over the long term. Our
consumption rate of fossil fuels is far greater than the rate at which they are stored, so it is inevitable that they will
be depleted. Power implies that energy is transferred, perhaps changing form. It is never possible to change one
form completely into another without losing some of it as thermal energy. For example, a 60-W incandescent bulb
converts only 5 W of electrical power to light, with 55 W dissipating into thermal energy. Furthermore, the typical
electric power plant converts only 35 to 40% of its fuel into electricity. The remainder becomes a huge amount of
thermal energy that must be dispersed as heat transfer, as rapidly as it is created. A coal-fired power plant may
produce 1000 megawatts; 1 megawatt (MW) is of electric power. But the power plant consumes chemical
energy at a rate of about 2500 MW, creating heat transfer to the surroundings at a rate of 1500 MW. (SeeFigure
7.22.)
FIGURE7.22Tremendous amounts of electric power are generated by coal-fired power plants such as this one in China, but an even larger
amount of power goes into heat transfer to the surroundings. The large cooling towers here are needed to transfer heat as rapidly as it is
produced. The transfer of heat is not unique to coal plants but is an unavoidable consequence of generating electric power from any
fuel—nuclear, coal, oil, natural gas, or the like. (credit: Kleinolive, Wikimedia Commons)
Object or Phenomenon Power in Watts
Supernova (at peak) ×
Milky Way galaxy
Crab Nebula pulsar
The Sun ×
Volcanic eruption (maximum) ×
Lightning bolt ×
TABLE7.3Power Output or Consumption
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 319
7.7 • Power 301
Object or Phenomenon Power in Watts
Nuclear power plant (total electric and heat transfer) ×
Aircraft carrier (total useful and heat transfer)
Dragster (total useful and heat transfer) ×
Car (total useful and heat transfer) ×
Football player (total useful and heat transfer) ×
Clothes dryer ×
Person at rest (all heat transfer)
Typical incandescent light bulb (total useful and heat transfer)
Heart, person at rest (total useful and heat transfer)
Electric clock
Pocket calculator
TABLE7.3Power Output or Consumption
Power and Energy Consumption
We usually have to pay for the energy we use. It is interesting and easy to estimate the cost of energy for an
electrical appliance if its power consumption rate and time used are known. The higher the power consumption rate
and the longer the appliance is used, the greater the cost of that appliance. The power consumption rate is
, where is the energy supplied by the electricity company. So the energy consumed over a time is
7.72
Electricity bills state the energy used in units ofkilowatt-hours which is the product of power in kilowatts
and time in hours. This unit is convenient because electrical power consumption at the kilowatt level for hours at a
time is typical.
EXAMPLE 7.12
Calculating Energy Costs
What is the cost of running a 0.200-kW computer 6.00 h per day for 30.0 d if the cost of electricity is $0.120 per
?
Strategy
Cost is based on energy consumed; thus, we must find from and then calculate the cost. Because
electrical energy is expressed in , at the start of a problem such as this it is convenient to convert the units
into and hours.
PAGE: 320
302 7 • Work, Energy, and Energy Resources
Solution
The energy consumed in is
7.73
and the cost is simply given by
7.74
Discussion
The cost of using the computer in this example is neither exorbitant nor negligible. It is clear that the cost is a
combination of power and time. When both are high, such as for an air conditioner in the summer, the cost is high.
The motivation to save energy has become more compelling with its ever-increasing price. Armed with the
knowledge that energy consumed is the product of power and time, you can estimate costs for yourself and make
the necessary value judgments about where to save energy. Either power or time must be reduced. It is most cost-
effective to limit the use of high-power devices that normally operate for long periods of time, such as water heaters
and air conditioners. This would not include relatively high power devices like toasters, because they are on only a
few minutes per day. It would also not include electric clocks, in spite of their 24-hour-per-day usage, because they
are very low power devices. It is sometimes possible to use devices that have greater efficiencies—that is, devices
that consume less power to accomplish the same task. One example is the compact fluorescent light bulb, which
produces over four times more light per watt of power consumed than its incandescent cousin.
Modern civilization depends on energy, but current levels of energy consumption and production are not
sustainable. The likelihood of a link between global warming and fossil fuel use (with its concomitant production of
carbon dioxide), has made reduction in energy use as well as a shift to non-fossil fuels of the utmost importance.
Even though energy in an isolated system is a conserved quantity, the final result of most energy transformations is
waste heat transfer to the environment, which is no longer useful for doing work. As we will discuss in more detail in
Thermodynamics, the potential for energy to produce useful work has been “degraded” in the energy
transformation.
7.8 Work, Energy, and Power in Humans
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the human body’s consumption of energy when at rest vs. when engaged in activities that do
useful work.
• Calculate the conversion of chemical energy in food into useful work.
Energy Conversion in Humans
Our own bodies, like all living organisms, are energy conversion machines. Conservation of energy implies that the
chemical energy stored in food is converted into work, thermal energy, and/or stored as chemical energy in fatty
tissue. (SeeFigure 7.23.) The fraction going into each form depends both on how much we eat and on our level of
physical activity. If we eat more than is needed to do work and stay warm, the remainder goes into body fat.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 321
7.8 • Work, Energy, and Power in Humans 303
FIGURE7.23Energy consumed by humans is converted to work, thermal energy, and stored fat. By far the largest fraction goes to thermal
energy, although the fraction varies depending on the type of physical activity.
Power Consumed at Rest
Therateat which the body uses food energy to sustain life and to do different activities is called themetabolic rate.
The total energy conversion rate of a personat restis called thebasal metabolic rate(BMR) and is divided among
various systems in the body, as shown inTable 7.4. The largest fraction goes to the liver and spleen, with the brain
coming next. Of course, during vigorous exercise, the energy consumption of the skeletal muscles and heart
increase markedly. About 75% of the calories burned in a day go into these basic functions. The BMR is a function of
age, gender, total body weight, and amount of muscle mass (which burns more calories than body fat). Athletes
have a greater BMR due to this last factor.
Organ Power consumed at rest (W) Oxygen consumption (mL/min) Percent of BMR
Liver & spleen 23 67 27
Brain 16 47 19
Skeletal muscle 15 45 18
Kidney 9 26 10
Heart 6 17 7
Other 16 48 19
Totals 85 W 250 mL/min 100%
TABLE7.4Basal Metabolic Rates (BMR)
Energy consumption is directly proportional to oxygen consumption because the digestive process is basically one
of oxidizing food. We can measure the energy people use during various activities by measuring their oxygen use.
(SeeFigure 7.24.) Approximately 20 kJ of energy are produced for each liter of oxygen consumed, independent of
the type of food.Table 7.5shows energy and oxygen consumption rates (power expended) for a variety of activities.
Power of Doing Useful Work
Work done by a person is sometimes calleduseful work, which iswork done on the outside world, such as lifting
weights. Useful work requires a force exerted through a distance on the outside world, and so it excludes internal
work, such as that done by the heart when pumping blood. Useful work does include that done in climbing stairs or
accelerating to a full run, because these are accomplished by exerting forces on the outside world. Forces exerted
by the body are nonconservative, so that they can change the mechanical energy ( ) of the system worked
upon, and this is often the goal. A baseball player throwing a ball, for example, increases both the ball’s kinetic and
potential energy.
PAGE: 322
304 7 • Work, Energy, and Energy Resources
If a person needs more energy than they consume, such as when doing vigorous work, the body must draw upon the
chemical energy stored in fat. So exercise can be helpful in losing fat. However, the amount of exercise needed to
produce a loss in fat, or to burn off extra calories consumed that day, can be large, asExample 7.13illustrates.
EXAMPLE 7.13
Calculating Weight Loss from Exercising
If a person who normally requires an average of 12,000 kJ (3000 kcal) of food energy per day consumes 13,000 kJ
per day, they will steadily add body fat. How much bicycling per day is required to work off this extra 1000 kJ?
Solution
Table 7.5states that 400 W are used when cycling at a moderate speed. The time required to work off 1000 kJ at
this rate is then
7.75
Discussion
If this person uses more energy than they consume, the person’s body will obtain the needed energy by
metabolizing body fat. If the person uses 13,000 kJ but consumes only 12,000 kJ, then the amount of fat loss will
be
7.76
assuming the energy content of fat to be 39 kJ/g.
FIGURE7.24A pulse oxymeter is an apparatus that measures the amount of oxygen in blood. A knowledge of oxygen and carbon dioxide
levels indicates a person’s metabolic rate, which is the rate at which food energy is converted to another form. Such measurements can
indicate the level of athletic conditioning as well as certain medical problems. (credit: UusiAjaja, Wikimedia Commons)
Activity Energy consumption in watts Oxygen consumption in liters O /min
2
Sleeping 83 0.24
Sitting at rest 120 0.34
Standing relaxed 125 0.36
Sitting in class 210 0.60
TABLE7.5Energy and Oxygen Consumption Rates 2 (Power)
2 for a 76-kg male with typical metabolic functions
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 323
7.8 • Work, Energy, and Power in Humans 305
Activity Energy consumption in watts Oxygen consumption in liters O /min
2
Walking (5 km/h) 280 0.80
Cycling (13–18 km/h) 400 1.14
Shivering 425 1.21
Playing tennis 440 1.26
Swimming breaststroke 475 1.36
Ice skating (14.5 km/h) 545 1.56
Climbing stairs (116/min) 685 1.96
Cycling (21 km/h) 700 2.00
Running cross-country 740 2.12
Playing basketball 800 2.28
Cycling, professional racer 1855 5.30
Sprinting 2415 6.90
TABLE7.5Energy and Oxygen Consumption Rates 2 (Power)
All bodily functions, from thinking to lifting weights, require energy. (SeeFigure 7.25.) The many small muscle
actions accompanying all quiet activity, from sleeping to head scratching, ultimately become thermal energy, as do
less visible muscle actions by the heart, lungs, and digestive tract. Shivering, in fact, is an involuntary response to
low body temperature that pits muscles against one another to produce thermal energy in the body (and do no
work). The kidneys and liver consume a surprising amount of energy, but the biggest surprise of all is that a full 25%
of all energy consumed by the body is used to maintain electrical potentials in all living cells. (Nerve cells use this
electrical potential in nerve impulses.) This bioelectrical energy ultimately becomes mostly thermal energy, but
some is utilized to power chemical processes such as in the kidneys and liver, and in fat production.
FIGURE7.25This fMRI scan shows an increased level of energy consumption in the vision center of the brain. Here, the patient was being
PAGE: 324
306 7 • Work, Energy, and Energy Resources
asked to recognize faces. (credit: NIH via Wikimedia Commons)
7.9 World Energy Use
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the distinction between renewable and nonrenewable energy sources.
• Explain why the inevitable conversion of energy to less useful forms makes it necessary to conserve
energy resources.
Energy is an important ingredient in all phases of society. We live in a very interdependent world, and access to
adequate and reliable energy resources is crucial for economic growth and for maintaining the quality of our lives.
But current levels of energy consumption and production are not sustainable. Depending on the data source,
estimates indicate that about 31–35% of the world’s energy comes from oil, and much of that goes to transportation
uses. This is a reduction by a few percentage points from ten years ago. Oil prices are dependent as much upon new
(or foreseen) discoveries as they are upon political events and situations around the world. The U.S., with 4.25% of
the world’s population, consumes 21% of the world’s oil production per year.
Renewable and Nonrenewable Energy Sources
The principal energy resources used in the world are shown inFigure 7.26. The fuel mix has changed over the years
but now is dominated by oil, although natural gas and solar contributions are increasing.Renewable forms of
energyare those sources that cannot be used up, such as water, wind, solar, and biomass. About 85% of our energy
comes from nonrenewablefossil fuels—oil, natural gas, coal. The likelihood of a link between global warming and
fossil fuel use, with its production of carbon dioxide through combustion, has made, in the eyes of many scientists, a
shift to non-fossil fuels of utmost importance—but it will not be easy.
FIGURE7.26World energy consumption by source, in billions of kilowatt-hours: 2006. (credit: KVDP)
The World’s Growing Energy Needs
World energy consumption continues to rise, especially in the developing countries. (SeeFigure 7.27.) Global
demand for energy has tripled in the past 50 years and might triple again in the next 30 years. While much of this
growth will come from the rapidly booming economies of China and India, many of the developed countries,
especially those in Europe, are hoping to meet their energy needs by expanding the use of renewable sources.
Although presently only a small percentage, renewable energy is growing very fast, especially wind energy. For
example, Germany plans to meet 65% of its power and 30% of its overall energy needs with renewable resources by
the year 2030. (SeeFigure 7.28.) Energy is a key constraint in the rapid economic growth of China and India. In
2003, China surpassed Japan as the world’s second largest consumer of oil. However, over 1/3 of this is imported.
Unlike most Western countries, coal dominates the commercial energy resources of China, accounting for 2/3 of its
energy consumption. In 2009 China surpassed the United States as the largest generator of . In India, the main
energy resources are biomass (wood and dung) and coal. Half of India’s oil is imported. About 70% of India’s
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 325
7.9 • World Energy Use 307
electricity is generated by highly polluting coal. Yet there are sizeable strides being made in renewable energy. India
has a rapidly growing wind energy base, and it has the largest solar cooking program in the world. China has
invested substantially in building solar collection farms as well as hydroelectric plants.
FIGURE7.27Past and projected world energy use (source: Based on data from U.S. Energy Information Administration, 2021)
FIGURE7.28Solar cell arrays at a power plant in California (credit: Bureau of Land Management, Flickr)
Table 7.6displays the 2020 commercial energy mix by country for some of the prime energy users in the world.
While non-renewable sources dominate, some countries get a sizeable percentage of their electricity from
renewable resources. For example, about two-thirds of New Zealand’s electricity demand is met by hydroelectric.
Only 10% of the U.S. electricity is generated by renewable resources, primarily hydroelectric. It is difficult to
determine total sources and consumers of energy in many countries, and estimates vary somewhat by data source
and type of measurement.
Consumption, in EJ Natural Other
Country Oil Coal Nuclear Hydro
(1018J) Gas Renewables
Australia 5.6 1.8% 1.5% 1.7% 0% 0.1% 0.5%
Brazil 12 4.6% 1.2% 0.6% 0.1% 3.5% 2%
China 145.5 28.5% 11.9% 82.3% 3.3% 11.7% 7.8%
Egypt 3.7 1.3% 2.1% 0.03% 0% 0.1% 0.1%
Germany 12.1 4.2% 3.1% 1.9% 0.6% 0.2% 2.2%
India 31.99 9% 2.2% 17.5% 0.4% 1.5% 1.4%
Indonesia 8.1 2.8% 1.5% 3.3% 0% 0.2% 0.4%
TABLE7.6Energy Consumption—Selected Countries (2020)
PAGE: 326
308 7 • Work, Energy, and Energy Resources
Consumption, in EJ Natural Other
Country Oil Coal Nuclear Hydro
(1018J) Gas Renewables
Japan 17 6.5% 3.8% 4.6% 0.4% 0.7% 1.1%
United
6.9 2.4% 2.6% 0.2% 0.5% 0.1% 1.2%
Kingdom
Russia 28.3 6.4% 14.8% 3.2% 1.9% 1.9% 0.5%
U.S. 87.8 32.5% 30% 9.2% 7.4% 2.6% 6.2%
World 557.1 174.2% 137.6% 151.4% 24% 38.2% 31.7%
TABLE7.6Energy Consumption—Selected Countries (2020)
Energy and Economic Well-being
Economic well-being is dependent upon energy use, and in most countries higher standards of living, as measured
by GDP (gross domestic product) per capita, are matched by higher levels of energy consumption per capita. This is
borne out inFigure 7.29. Increased efficiency of energy use will change this dependency. A global problem is
balancing energy resource development against the harmful effects upon the environment in its extraction and use.
New and diversified energy sources do, however, greatly increase economic opportunity and stability. First, the
extensive employment opportunities in renewable energy make it one of the most sustainable and secure fields to
enter. Second, renewable energy provides countries and localities with increased levels of resiliency in the face of
natural disasters, conflict, or other disruptions. The 21st century has already seen major economic impacts from
energy disruptions: Hurricane Katrina, Superstorm Sandy, various wildfires, Hurricane Maria, and the 2021 Texas
Winter Storm demonstrate the vulnerability of United States power systems. Diversifying energy sources through
renewables and other fossil-fuel alternatives brings power grids and transportation systems back online much more
quickly, saving lives and enabling a more swift return to economic operations. And as critical emerging information
infrastructure, such as data centers, requires more of the world's energy, supplying those growing systems during
normal operations and crises will be increasingly important.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 327
7.9 • World Energy Use 309
FIGURE7.29Power consumption per capita versus GDP per capita for various countries. Note the increase in energy usage with increasing
GDP. (2007, credit: Frank van Mierlo, Wikimedia Commons)
Conserving Energy
As we finish this chapter on energy and work, it is relevant to draw some distinctions between two sometimes
misunderstood terms in the area of energy use. As has been mentioned elsewhere, the “law of the conservation of
energy” is a very useful principle in analyzing physical processes. It is a statement that cannot be proven from basic
principles, but is a very good bookkeeping device, and no exceptions have ever been found. It states that the total
amount of energy in an isolated system will always remain constant. Related to this principle, but remarkably
different from it, is the important philosophy of energy conservation. This concept has to do with seeking to
decrease the amount of energy used by an individual or group through (1) reduced activities (e.g., turning down
thermostats, driving fewer kilometers) and/or (2) increasing conversion efficiencies in the performance of a
particular task—such as developing and using more efficient room heaters, cars that have greater miles-per-gallon
ratings, energy-efficient compact fluorescent lights, etc.
Since energy in an isolated system is not destroyed or created or generated, one might wonder why we need to be
concerned about our energy resources, since energy is a conserved quantity. The problem is that the final result of
most energy transformations is waste heat transfer to the environment and conversion to energy forms no longer
useful for doing work. To state it in another way, the potential for energy to produce useful work has been
“degraded” in the energy transformation. (This will be discussed in more detail inThermodynamics.)
PAGE: 328
310 7 • Glossary
Glossary
basal metabolic rate the total energy conversion rate mechanical energy the sum of kinetic energy and
of a person at rest potential energy
chemical energy the energy in a substance stored in metabolic rate the rate at which the body uses food
the bonds between atoms and molecules that can energy to sustain life and to do different activities
be released in a chemical reaction net work work done by the net force, or vector sum of
conservation of mechanical energy the rule that the all the forces, acting on an object
sum of the kinetic energies and potential energies nonconservative force a force whose work depends
remains constant if only conservative forces act on on the path followed between the given initial and
and within a system final configurations
conservative force a force that does the same work nuclear energy energy released by changes within
for any given initial and final configuration, atomic nuclei, such as the fusion of two light nuclei
regardless of the path followed or the fission of a heavy nucleus
efficiency a measure of the effectiveness of the input potential energy energy due to position, shape, or
of energy to do work; useful energy or work divided configuration
by the total input of energy potential energy of a spring the stored energy of a
electrical energy the energy carried by a flow of spring as a function of its displacement; when
charge Hooke’s law applies, it is given by the expression
energy the ability to do work where is the distance the spring is
fossil fuels oil, natural gas, and coal compressed or extended and is the spring
friction the force between surfaces that opposes one constant
sliding on the other; friction changes mechanical power the rate at which work is done
energy into thermal energy radiant energy the energy carried by electromagnetic
gravitational potential energy the energy an object waves
has due to its position in a gravitational field renewable forms of energy those sources that
horsepower an older non-SI unit of power, with cannot be used up, such as water, wind, solar, and
biomass
joule SI unit of work and energy, equal to one thermal energy the energy within an object due to
newton-meter the random motion of its atoms and molecules that
kilowatt-hour unit used primarily for accounts for the object's temperature
electrical energy provided by electric utility useful work work done on an external system
companies watt (W) SI unit of power, with
kinetic energy the energy an object has by reason of work the transfer of energy by a force that causes an
its motion, equal to for the translational (i.e., object to be displaced; the product of the
non-rotational) motion of an object of mass component of the force in the direction of the
moving at speed displacement and the magnitude of the
law of conservation of energy the general law that displacement
total energy is constant in any process; energy may work-energy theorem the result, based on Newton’s
change in form or be transferred from one system to laws, that the net work done on an object is equal to
another, but the total remains the same its change in kinetic energy
Section Summary
7.1Work: The Scientific Definition • The work done by a force is zero if the
displacement is either zero or perpendicular to the
• Work is the transfer of energy by a force acting on
force.
an object as it is displaced.
• The work done is positive if the force and
• The work that a force does on an object is the
displacement have the same direction, and
product of the magnitude of the force, times the
negative if they have opposite direction.
magnitude of the displacement, times the cosine
of the angle between them. In symbols, 7.2Kinetic Energy and the Work-Energy
Theorem
• The SI unit for work and energy is the joule (J),
• The net work is the work done by the net
where .
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 329
7 • Section Summary 311
force acting on an object. • Friction is an example of a nonconservative force
• Work done on an object transfers energy to the that changes mechanical energy into thermal
object. energy.
• The translational kinetic energy of an object of • Work done by a nonconservative force
mass moving at speed is . changes the mechanical energy of a system. In
• The work-energy theorem states that the net work equation form, or,
on a system changes its kinetic energy, equivalently, .
• When both conservative and nonconservative
.
forces act, energy conservation can be applied and
7.3Gravitational Potential Energy used to calculate motion in terms of the known
potential energies of the conservative forces and
• Work done against gravity in lifting an object
the work done by nonconservative forces, instead
becomes potential energy of the object-Earth
of finding the net work from the net force, or
system.
having to directly apply Newton’s laws.
• The change in gravitational potential energy,
, is , with being the increase in 7.6Conservation of Energy
height and the acceleration due to gravity.
• The law of conservation of energy states that the
• The gravitational potential energy of an object near
total energy is constant in any process. Energy
Earth’s surface is due to its position in the mass-
may change in form or be transferred from one
Earth system. Only differences in gravitational
system to another, but the total remains the same.
potential energy, , have physical
• When all forms of energy are considered,
significance.
conservation of energy is written in equation form
• As an object descends without friction, its
as
gravitational potential energy changes into kinetic
, where is allother forms of energybesides
energy corresponding to increasing speed, so that
mechanical energy.
.
• Commonly encountered forms of energy include
electric energy, chemical energy, radiant energy,
7.4Conservative Forces and Potential
nuclear energy, and thermal energy.
Energy
• Energy is often utilized to do work, but it is not
• A conservative force is one for which work possible to convert all the energy of a system to
depends only on the starting and ending points of work.
a motion, not on the path taken. • The efficiency of a machine or human is
• We can define potential energy for any defined to be , where is useful
conservative force, just as we defined for the
work output and is the energy consumed.
gravitational force.
• The potential energy of a spring is , 7.7Power
where is the spring’s force constant and is the
• Power is the rate at which work is done, or in
displacement from its undeformed position.
equation form, for the average power for work
• Mechanical energy is defined to be for a
done over a time , .
conservative force.
• The SI unit for power is the watt (W), where
• When only conservative forces act on and within a
.
system, the total mechanical energy is constant. In
• The power of many devices such as electric
equation form,
motors is also often expressed in horsepower (hp),
where .
7.8Work, Energy, and Power in Humans
• The human body converts energy stored in food
where i and f denote initial and final values. This is
into work, thermal energy, and/or chemical energy
known as the conservation of mechanical energy.
that is stored in fatty tissue.
7.5Nonconservative Forces • Therateat which the body uses food energy to
sustain life and to do different activities is called
• A nonconservative force is one for which work
the metabolic rate, and the corresponding rate
depends on the path.
PAGE: 330
312 7 • Conceptual Questions
when at rest is called the basal metabolic rate and solar contributions are increasing.
(BMR) • Although non-renewable sources dominate, some
• The energy included in the basal metabolic rate is countries meet a sizeable percentage of their
divided among various systems in the body, with electricity needs from renewable resources.
the largest fraction going to the liver and spleen, • The United States obtains only about 10% of its
and the brain coming next. energy from renewable sources, mostly
• About 75% of food calories are used to sustain hydroelectric power.
basic body functions included in the basal • Economic well-being is dependent upon energy
metabolic rate. use, and in most countries higher standards of
• The energy consumption of people during various living, as measured by GDP (Gross Domestic
activities can be determined by measuring their Product) per capita, are matched by higher levels
oxygen use, because the digestive process is of energy consumption per capita.
basically one of oxidizing food. • Even though, in accordance with the law of
conservation of energy, energy can never be
7.9World Energy Use
created or destroyed, energy that can be used to
• The relative use of different fuels to provide energy do work is always partly converted to less useful
has changed over the years, but fuel use is forms, such as waste heat to the environment, in
currently dominated by oil, although natural gas all of our uses of energy for practical purposes.
Conceptual Questions
7.1Work: The Scientific Definition 6. When solving for speed inExample 7.4, we kept
only the positive root. Why?
1. Give an example of something we think of as work
in everyday circumstances that is not work in the
7.3Gravitational Potential Energy
scientific sense. Is energy transferred or changed in
form in your example? If so, explain how this is 7. InExample 7.7, we calculated the final speed of a
accomplished without doing work. roller coaster that descended 20 m in height and
2. Give an example of a situation in which there is a had an initial speed of 5 m/s downhill. Suppose the
force and a displacement, but the force does no roller coaster had had an initial speed of 5 m/s
work. Explain why it does no work. uphillinstead, and it coasted uphill, stopped, and
3. Describe a situation in which a force is exerted for a then rolled back down to a final point 20 m below
long time but does no work. Explain. the start. We would find in that case that its final
speed is the same as its initial speed. Explain in
7.2Kinetic Energy and the Work-Energy terms of conservation of energy.
Theorem 8. Does the work you do on a book when you lift it
onto a shelf depend on the path taken? On the time
4. The person inFigure 7.30does work on the lawn
taken? On the height of the shelf? On the mass of
mower. Under what conditions would the mower gain
the book?
energy? Under what conditions would it lose energy?
7.4Conservative Forces and Potential
Energy
9. What is a conservative force?
10. The force exerted by a diving board is
conservative, provided the internal friction is
negligible. Assuming friction is negligible, describe
changes in the potential energy of a diving board
as a swimmer dives from it, starting just before the
swimmer steps on the board until just after his
feet leave it.
FIGURE7.30 11. Define mechanical energy. What is the relationship
5. Work done on a system puts energy into it. Work of mechanical energy to nonconservative forces?
done by a system removes energy from it. Give an What happens to mechanical energy if only
example for each statement. conservative forces act?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 331
7 • Problems & Exercises 313
12. What is the relationship of potential energy to 7.7Power
conservative force?
18. Most electrical appliances are rated in watts. Does
this rating depend on how long the appliance is
7.6Conservation of Energy
on? (When off, it is a zero-watt device.) Explain in
13. Consider the following scenario. A car for which friction terms of the definition of power.
isnotnegligible accelerates from rest down a hill, 19. Explain, in terms of the definition of power, why
running out of gasoline after a short distance. The energy consumption is sometimes listed in
driver lets the car coast farther down the hill, then up kilowatt-hours rather than joules. What is the
and over a small crest. He then coasts down that hill relationship between these two energy units?
into a gas station, where he brakes to a stop and fills 20. A spark of static electricity, such as that you might
the tank with gasoline. Identify the forms of energy the receive from a doorknob on a cold dry day, may
car has, and how they are changed and transferred in carry a few hundred watts of power. Explain why
this series of events. (SeeFigure 7.31.) you are not injured by such a spark.
7.8Work, Energy, and Power in Humans
21. Explain why it is easier to climb a mountain on a
zigzag path rather than one straight up the side. Is
your increase in gravitational potential energy the
same in both cases? Is your energy consumption
the same in both?
22. Do you do work on the outside world when you rub
FIGURE7.31A car experiencing non-negligible friction coasts your hands together to warm them? What is the
down a hill, over a small crest, then downhill again, and comes to
efficiency of this activity?
a stop at a gas station.
23. Shivering is an involuntary response to lowered
14. Describe the energy transfers and transformations
body temperature. What is the efficiency of the
for a javelin, starting from the point at which an
body when shivering, and is this a desirable value?
athlete picks up the javelin and ending when the
24. Discuss the relative impact of dieting and exercise,
javelin is stuck into the ground after being thrown.
noting that most athletic activities consume food
15. Do devices with efficiencies of less than one
energy at a rate of 400 to 500 W, while a single
violate the law of conservation of energy? Explain.
cup of yogurt can contain 1360 kJ (325 kcal).
16. List four different forms or types of energy. Give
one example of a conversion from each of these
7.9World Energy Use
forms to another form.
17. List the energy conversions that occur when riding 25. What is the difference between energy
a bicycle. conservation and the law of conservation of
energy? Give some examples of each.
26. If the efficiency of a coal-fired electrical
generating plant is 35%, then what do we mean
when we say that energy is a conserved quantity?
Problems & Exercises
7.1Work: The Scientific Definition 3. (a) Calculate the work done on a 1500-kg elevator
car by its cable to lift it 40.0 m at constant speed,
1. How much work does a supermarket checkout
assuming friction averages 100 N. (b) What is the
attendant do on a can of soup he pushes 0.600 m
work done on the elevator car by the gravitational
horizontally with a force of 5.00 N? Express your
force in this process? (c) What is the total work
answer in joules and kilocalories.
done on the elevator car?
2. A 75.0-kg person climbs stairs, gaining 2.50 meters
in height. Find the work done to accomplish this
task. (Neglect friction in your calculations.)
PAGE: 332
314 7 • Problems & Exercises
4. Suppose a car travels 108 km at a speed of 30.0 m/ 8. Suppose the ski patrol lowers a rescue sled and
s, and uses 2.0 gal of gasoline. Only 30% of the victim, having a total mass of 90.0 kg, down a
gasoline goes into useful work by the force that slope at constant speed, as shown inFigure 7.34.
keeps the car moving at constant speed despite The coefficient of friction between the sled and the
friction. (SeeTable 7.1for the energy content of snow is 0.100. (a) How much work is done by
gasoline.) (a) What is the magnitude of the force friction as the sled moves 30.0 m along the hill? (b)
exerted to keep the car moving at constant speed? How much work is done by the rope on the sled in
(b) If the required force is directly proportional to this distance? (c) What is the work done by the
speed, how many gallons will be used to drive 108 gravitational force on the sled? (d) What is the total
km at a speed of 28.0 m/s? work done?
5. Calculate the work done by an 85.0-kg man who
pushes a crate 4.00 m up along a ramp that makes
an angle of with the horizontal. (SeeFigure
7.32.) He exerts a force of 500 N on the crate
parallel to the ramp and moves at a constant speed.
Be certain to include the work he does on the crate
andon his body to get up the ramp.
FIGURE7.32A man pushes a crate up a ramp.
FIGURE7.34A rescue sled and victim are lowered down a
6. How much work is done by the boy pulling his sister
steep slope.
30.0 m in a wagon as shown inFigure 7.33?
Assume no friction acts on the wagon.
7.2Kinetic Energy and the Work-Energy
Theorem
9. Compare the kinetic energy of a 20,000-kg truck
moving at 110 km/h with that of an 80.0-kg
astronaut in orbit moving at 27,500 km/h.
10. (a) How fast must a 3000-kg elephant move to
have the same kinetic energy as a 65.0-kg sprinter
running at 10.0 m/s? (b) Discuss how the larger
energies needed for the movement of larger
animals would relate to metabolic rates.
11. Confirm the value given for the kinetic energy of
FIGURE7.33The boy does work on the system of the wagon
and the child when he pulls them as shown. an aircraft carrier inTable 7.1. You will need to
look up the definition of a nautical mile (1 knot = 1
7. A shopper pushes a grocery cart 20.0 m at constant
nautical mile/h).
speed on level ground, against a 35.0 N frictional
12. (a) Calculate the force needed to bring a 950-kg
force. He pushes in a direction below the
car to rest from a speed of 90.0 km/h in a distance
horizontal. (a) What is the work done on the cart by
of 120 m (a fairly typical distance for a non-panic
friction? (b) What is the work done on the cart by
stop). (b) Suppose instead the car hits a concrete
the gravitational force? (c) What is the work done on
abutment at full speed and is brought to a stop in
the cart by the shopper? (d) Find the force the
2.00 m. Calculate the force exerted on the car and
shopper exerts, using energy considerations. (e)
compare it with the force found in part (a).
What is the total work done on the cart?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 333
7 • Problems & Exercises 315
13. A car’s bumper is designed to withstand a 17. (a) How much gravitational potential energy
4.0-km/h (1.12-m/s) collision with an immovable (relative to the ground on which it is built) is
object without damage to the body of the car. The stored in the Great Pyramid of Cheops, given that
bumper cushions the shock by absorbing the force its mass is about and its center of
over a distance. Calculate the magnitude of the mass is 36.5 m above the surrounding ground? (b)
average force on a bumper that collapses 0.200 m How does this energy compare with the daily food
while bringing a 900-kg car to rest from an initial intake of a person?
speed of 1.12 m/s. 18. Suppose a 350-g kookaburra (a large kingfisher
14. Boxing gloves are padded to lessen the force of a bird) picks up a 75-g snake and raises it 2.5 m
blow. (a) Calculate the force exerted by a boxing from the ground to a branch. (a) How much work
glove on an opponent’s face, if the glove and face did the bird do on the snake? (b) How much work
compress 7.50 cm during a blow in which the did it do to raise its own center of mass to the
7.00-kg arm and glove are brought to rest from an branch?
initial speed of 10.0 m/s. (b) Calculate the force 19. InExample 7.7, we found that the speed of a
exerted by an identical blow in the days when no roller coaster that had descended 20.0 m was only
gloves were used and the knuckles and face would slightly greater when it had an initial speed of 5.00
compress only 2.00 cm. (c) Discuss the magnitude m/s than when it started from rest. This implies
of the force with glove on. Does it seem high that . Confirm this statement by
enough to cause damage even though it is lower taking the ratio of to . (Note that mass
than the force with no glove? cancels.)
15. Using energy considerations, calculate the 20. A 100-g toy car is propelled by a compressed
average force a 60.0-kg sprinter exerts backward spring that starts it moving. The car follows the
on the track to accelerate from 2.00 to 8.00 m/s in curved track inFigure 7.36. Show that the final
a distance of 25.0 m, if he encounters a headwind speed of the toy car is 0.687 m/s if its initial speed
that exerts an average force of 30.0 N against him. is 2.00 m/s and it coasts up the frictionless slope,
gaining 0.180 m in altitude.
7.3Gravitational Potential Energy
16. A hydroelectric power facility (seeFigure 7.35)
converts the gravitational potential energy of
water behind a dam to electric energy. (a) What is
the gravitational potential energy relative to the
generators of a lake of volume
( , given that the lake has
an average height of 40.0 m above the generators?
(b) Compare this with the energy stored in a
9-megaton fusion bomb. FIGURE7.36A toy car moves up a sloped track. (credit:
Leszek Leszczynski, Flickr)
21. In a downhill ski race, surprisingly, little advantage
is gained by getting a running start. (This is
because the initial kinetic energy is small
compared with the gain in gravitational potential
energy on even small hills.) To demonstrate this,
find the final speed and the time taken for a skier
who skies 70.0 m along a slope neglecting
friction: (a) Starting from rest. (b) Starting with an
initial speed of 2.50 m/s. (c) Does the answer
surprise you? Discuss why it is still advantageous
to get a running start in very competitive events.
FIGURE7.35Hydroelectric facility (credit: Denis Belevich,
Wikimedia Commons)
PAGE: 334
316 7 • Problems & Exercises
7.4Conservative Forces and Potential 27. Using energy considerations and assuming
Energy negligible air resistance, show that a rock thrown
from a bridge 20.0 m above water with an initial
22. A subway train is brought to a stop
speed of 15.0 m/s strikes the water with a speed
from a speed of 0.500 m/s in 0.400 m by a large
of 24.8 m/s independent of the direction thrown.
spring bumper at the end of its track. What is the
28. If the energy in fusion bombs were used to supply
force constant of the spring?
the energy needs of the world, how many of the
23. A pogo stick has a spring with a force constant of
9-megaton variety would be needed for a year’s
× , which can be compressed 12.0 supply of energy (using data fromTable 7.1)? This
cm. To what maximum height can a child jump on is not as far-fetched as it may sound—there are
the stick using only the energy in the spring, if the thousands of nuclear bombs, and their energy can
child and stick have a total mass of 40.0 kg? be trapped in underground explosions and
Explicitly show how you follow the steps in the converted to electricity, as natural geothermal
Problem-Solving Strategies for Energy. energy is.
29. (a) Use of hydrogen fusion to supply energy is a
7.5Nonconservative Forces dream that may be realized in the next century.
Fusion would be a relatively clean and almost
24. A 60.0-kg skier with an initial speed of 12.0 m/s
limitless supply of energy, as can be seen from
coasts up a 2.50-m-high rise as shown inFigure
Table 7.1. To illustrate this, calculate how many
7.37. Find her final speed at the top, given that the
years the present energy needs of the world could
coefficient of friction between her skis and the
be supplied by one millionth of the oceans’
snow is 0.0800. (Hint: Find the distance traveled
hydrogen fusion energy. (b) How does this time
up the incline assuming a straight-line path as
compare with historically significant events, such
shown in the figure.)
as the duration of stable economic systems?
7.7Power
30. The Crab Nebula (seeFigure 7.38) pulsar is the
remnant of a supernova that occurred in A.D.
1054. Using data fromTable 7.3, calculate the
approximate factor by which the power output of
FIGURE7.37The skier’s initial kinetic energy is partially
used in coasting to the top of a rise. this astronomical object has declined since its
explosion.
25. (a) How high a hill can a car coast up (engine
disengaged) if work done by friction is negligible
and its initial speed is 110 km/h? (b) If, in
actuality, a 750-kg car with an initial speed of 110
km/h is observed to coast up a hill to a height 22.0
m above its starting point, how much thermal
energy was generated by friction? (c) What is the
average force of friction if the hill has a slope
above the horizontal?
7.6Conservation of Energy
26. Using values fromTable 7.1, how many DNA
molecules could be broken by the energy carried
by a single electron in the beam of an old-
fashioned TV tube? (These electrons were not
dangerous in themselves, but they did create
dangerous x rays. Later model tube TVs had
FIGURE7.38Crab Nebula (credit: ESO, via Wikimedia
shielding that absorbed x rays before they Commons)
escaped and exposed viewers.)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 335
7 • Problems & Exercises 317
31. Suppose a star 1000 times brighter than our Sun 39. (a) Find the useful power output of an elevator
(that is, emitting 1000 times the power) suddenly motor that lifts a 2500-kg load a height of 35.0 m
goes supernova. Using data fromTable 7.3: (a) By in 12.0 s, if it also increases the speed from rest to
what factor does its power output increase? (b) 4.00 m/s. Note that the total mass of the
How many times brighter than our entire Milky counterbalanced system is 10,000 kg—so that
Way galaxy is the supernova? (c) Based on your only 2500 kg is raised in height, but the full
answers, discuss whether it should be possible to 10,000 kg is accelerated. (b) What does it cost, if
observe supernovas in distant galaxies. Note that electricity is $0.0900 per ?
there are on the order of observable 40. (a) What is the available energy content, in joules,
galaxies, the average brightness of which is of a battery that operates a 2.00-W electric clock
somewhat less than our own galaxy. for 18 months? (b) How long can a battery that
32. A person in good physical condition can put out can supply × run a pocket calculator
100 W of useful power for several hours at a
that consumes energy at the rate of
stretch, perhaps by pedaling a mechanism that
× ?
drives an electric generator. Neglecting any
problems of generator efficiency and practical 41. (a) How long would it take a × -kg airplane
considerations such as resting time: (a) How many with engines that produce 100 MW of power to
people would it take to run a 4.00-kW electric reach a speed of 250 m/s and an altitude of 12.0
clothes dryer? (b) How many people would it take km if air resistance were negligible? (b) If it
to replace a large electric power plant that actually takes 900 s, what is the power? (c) Given
generates 800 MW? this power, what is the average force of air
33. What is the cost of operating a 3.00-W electric resistance if the airplane takes 1200 s? (Hint: You
clock for a year if the cost of electricity is $0.0900 must find the distance the plane travels in 1200 s
per ? assuming constant acceleration.)
34. A large household air conditioner may consume 42. Calculate the power output needed for a 950-kg
15.0 kW of power. What is the cost of operating car to climb a slope at a constant 30.0 m/s
this air conditioner 3.00 h per day for 30.0 d if the while encountering wind resistance and friction
cost of electricity is $0.110 per ? totaling 600 N. Explicitly show how you follow the
35. (a) What is the average power consumption in steps in theProblem-Solving Strategies for
watts of an appliance that uses of Energy.
energy per day? (b) How many joules of energy 43. (a) Calculate the power per square meter reaching
does this appliance consume in a year? Earth’s upper atmosphere from the Sun. (Take the
36. (a) What is the average useful power output of a power output of the Sun to be (b)
person who does × of useful work in Part of this is absorbed and reflected by the
8.00 h? (b) Working at this rate, how long will it atmosphere, so that a maximum of
take this person to lift 2000 kg of bricks 1.50 m to reaches Earth’s surface. Calculate the area in
a platform? (Work done to lift his body can be of solar energy collectors needed to replace an
omitted because it is not considered useful output electric power plant that generates 750 MW if the
here.) collectors convert an average of 2.00% of the
37. A 500-kg dragster accelerates from rest to a final maximum power into electricity. (This small
speed of 110 m/s in 400 m (about a quarter of a conversion efficiency is due to the devices
mile) and encounters an average frictional force of themselves, and the fact that the sun is directly
1200 N. What is its average power output in watts overhead only briefly.) With the same
and horsepower if this takes 7.30 s? assumptions, what area would be needed to meet
38. (a) How long will it take an 850-kg car with a the United States’ energy needs
useful power output of 40.0 hp (1 hp = 746 W) to Australia’s energy needs China’s
reach a speed of 15.0 m/s, neglecting friction? (b) energy needs (These energy
How long will this acceleration take if the car also consumption values are from 2006.)
climbs a 3.00-m-high hill in the process?
PAGE: 336
318 7 • Problems & Exercises
7.8Work, Energy, and Power in Humans 50. What is the efficiency of a subject on a treadmill
who puts out work at the rate of 100 W while
44. (a) How long can you rapidly climb stairs (116/
consuming oxygen at the rate of 2.00 L/min? (Hint:
min) on the 93.0 kcal of energy in a 10.0-g pat of
SeeTable 7.5.)
butter? (b) How many flights is this if each flight
51. Shoveling snow can be extremely taxing because
has 16 stairs?
the arms have such a low efficiency in this activity.
45. (a) What is the power output in watts and
Suppose a person shoveling a footpath
horsepower of a 70.0-kg sprinter who accelerates
metabolizes food at the rate of 800 W. (a) What is
from rest to 10.0 m/s in 3.00 s? (b) Considering
her useful power output? (b) How long will it take
the amount of power generated, do you think a
her to lift 3000 kg of snow 1.20 m? (This could be
well-trained athlete could do this repetitively for
the amount of heavy snow on 20 m of footpath.)
long periods of time?
(c) How much waste heat transfer in kilojoules will
46. Calculate the power output in watts and
she generate in the process?
horsepower of a shot-putter who takes 1.20 s to
52. Very large forces are produced in joints when a
accelerate the 7.27-kg shot from rest to 14.0 m/s,
person jumps from some height to the ground. (a)
while raising it 0.800 m. (Do not include the power
Calculate the magnitude of the force produced if
produced to accelerate his body.)
an 80.0-kg person jumps from a 0.600–m-high
ledge and lands stiffly, compressing joint material
1.50 cm as a result. (Be certain to include the
weight of the person.) (b) In practice the knees
bend almost involuntarily to help extend the
distance over which you stop. Calculate the
magnitude of the force produced if the stopping
distance is 0.300 m. (c) Compare both forces with
the weight of the person.
53. Jogging on hard surfaces with insufficiently
padded shoes produces large forces in the feet
and legs. (a) Calculate the magnitude of the force
needed to stop the downward motion of a jogger’s
leg, if his leg has a mass of 13.0 kg, a speed of
6.00 m/s, and stops in a distance of 1.50 cm. (Be
FIGURE7.39Shot putter at the Dornoch Highland Gathering
in 2007. (credit: John Haslam, Flickr) certain to include the weight of the 75.0-kg
jogger’s body.) (b) Compare this force with the
47. (a) What is the efficiency of an out-of-condition
weight of the jogger.
person who does × of useful work while
54. (a) Calculate the energy in kJ used by a 55.0-kg
metabolizing 500 kcal of food energy? (b) How person who does 50 deep knee bends in which
many food calories would a well-conditioned their center of mass is lowered and raised 0.400
athlete metabolize in doing the same work with an m. (They do work in both directions.) You may
efficiency of 20%? assume their efficiency is 20%. (b) What is the
48. Energy that is not utilized for work or heat transfer average power consumption rate in watts if they
is converted to the chemical energy of body fat do this in 3.00 min?
containing about 39 kJ/g. How many grams of fat
will you gain if you eat 10,000 kJ (about 2500
kcal) one day and do nothing but sit relaxed for
16.0 h and sleep for the other 8.00 h? Use data
fromTable 7.5for the energy consumption rates
of these activities.
49. Using data fromTable 7.5, calculate the daily
energy needs of a person who sleeps for 7.00 h,
walks for 2.00 h, attends classes for 4.00 h, cycles
for 2.00 h, sits relaxed for 3.00 h, and studies for
6.00 h. (Studying consumes energy at the same
rate as sitting in class.)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 337
7 • Problems & Exercises 319
55. Kanellos Kanellopoulos flew 119 km from Crete to 58. The awe-inspiring Great Pyramid of Cheops was
Santorini, Greece, on April 23, 1988, in the built more than 4500 years ago. Its square base,
Daedalus 88, an aircraft powered by a bicycle- originally 230 m on a side, covered 13.1 acres,
type drive mechanism (seeFigure 7.40). His and it was 146 m high, with a mass of about
useful power output for the 234-min trip was . (The pyramid’s dimensions are
about 350 W. Using the efficiency for cycling from slightly different today due to quarrying and some
Table 7.2, calculate the food energy in kilojoules sagging.) Historians estimate that 20,000 workers
he metabolized during the flight. spent 20 years to construct it, working 12-hour
days, 330 days per year. (a) Calculate the
gravitational potential energy stored in the
pyramid, given its center of mass is at one-fourth
its height. (b) Only a fraction of the workers lifted
blocks; most were involved in support services
such as building ramps (seeFigure 7.42), bringing
food and water, and hauling blocks to the site.
Calculate the efficiency of the workers who did the
lifting, assuming there were 1000 of them and
they consumed food energy at the rate of 300
kcal/h. What does your answer imply about how
much of their work went into block-lifting, versus
how much work went into friction and lifting and
FIGURE7.40The Daedalus 88 in flight. (credit: NASA photo lowering their own bodies? (c) Calculate the mass
by Beasley) of food that had to be supplied each day,
56. The swimmer shown inFigure 7.41exerts an assuming that the average worker required 3600
average horizontal backward force of 80.0 N with kcal per day and that their diet was 5% protein,
his arm during each 1.80 m long stroke. (a) What 60% carbohydrate, and 35% fat. (These
is his work output in each stroke? (b) Calculate the proportions neglect the mass of bulk and
power output of his arms if he does 120 strokes nondigestible materials consumed.)
per minute.
FIGURE7.41
57. Mountain climbers carry bottled oxygen when at
very high altitudes. (a) Assuming that a mountain FIGURE7.42Ancient pyramids were probably constructed
climber uses oxygen at twice the rate for climbing using ramps as simple machines. (credit: Franck Monnier,
Wikimedia Commons)
116 stairs per minute (because of low air
temperature and winds), calculate how many 59. (a) How long can you play tennis on the 800 kJ
liters of oxygen a climber would need for 10.0 h of (about 200 kcal) of energy in a candy bar? (b)
climbing. (These are liters at sea level.) Note that Does this seem like a long time? Discuss why
only 40% of the inhaled oxygen is utilized; the rest exercise is necessary but may not be sufficient to
is exhaled. (b) How much useful work does the cause a person to lose weight.
climber do if he and his equipment have a mass of
90.0 kg and he gains 1000 m of altitude? (c) What
is his efficiency for the 10.0-h climb?
PAGE: 338
320 7 • Problems & Exercises
7.9World Energy Use 63. Integrated Concepts
A toy gun uses a spring with a force constant of
60. Integrated Concepts
300 N/m to propel a 10.0-g steel ball. If the spring
(a) Calculate the force the woman inFigure 7.43
is compressed 7.00 cm and friction is negligible:
exerts to do a push-up at constant speed, taking
(a) How much force is needed to compress the
all data to be known to three digits. (b) How much
spring? (b) To what maximum height can the ball
work does she do if her center of mass rises 0.240
be shot? (c) At what angles above the horizontal
m? (c) What is her useful power output if she does
may a child aim to hit a target 3.00 m away at the
25 push-ups in 1 min? (Should work done
same height as the gun? (d) What is the gun’s
lowering her body be included? See the discussion
maximum range on level ground?
of useful work inWork, Energy, and Power in
64. Integrated Concepts
Humans.
(a) What force must be supplied by an elevator
cable to produce an acceleration of
against a 200-N frictional force, if the mass of the
loaded elevator is 1500 kg? (b) How much work is
done by the cable in lifting the elevator 20.0 m?
(c) What is the final speed of the elevator if it
starts from rest? (d) How much work went into
thermal energy?
65. Unreasonable Results
FIGURE7.43Forces involved in doing push-ups. The A car advertisement claims that its 900-kg car
woman’s weight acts as a force exerted downward on her
accelerated from rest to 30.0 m/s and drove 100
center of gravity (CG).
km, gaining 3.00 km in altitude, on 1.0 gal of
61. Integrated Concepts
gasoline. The average force of friction including air
A 75.0-kg cross-country skier is climbing a
resistance was 700 N. Assume all values are
slope at a constant speed of 2.00 m/s and
known to three significant figures. (a) Calculate
encounters air resistance of 25.0 N. Find his
the car’s efficiency. (b) What is unreasonable
power output for work done against the
about the result? (c) Which premise is
gravitational force and air resistance. (b) What
unreasonable, or which premises are
average force does he exert backward on the snow
inconsistent?
to accomplish this? (c) If he continues to exert this
66. Unreasonable Results
force and to experience the same air resistance
Body fat is metabolized, supplying 9.30 kcal/g,
when he reaches a level area, how long will it take
when dietary intake is less than needed to fuel
him to reach a velocity of 10.0 m/s?
metabolism. The manufacturers of an exercise
62. Integrated Concepts
bicycle claim that you can metabolize 0.500 kg of
The 70.0-kg swimmer inFigure 7.41starts a race
fat per day by vigorously exercising for 2.00 h per
with an initial velocity of 1.25 m/s and exerts an
day on their machine. (a) How many kcal are
average force of 80.0 N backward with his arms
supplied by the metabolization of 0.500 kg of fat?
during each 1.80 m long stroke. (a) What is his
(b) Calculate the kcal/min that you would have to
initial acceleration if water resistance is 45.0 N?
utilize to metabolize fat at the rate of 0.500 kg in
(b) What is the subsequent average resistance
2.00 h. (c) What is unreasonable about the
force from the water during the 5.00 s it takes him
results? (d) Which premise is unreasonable, or
to reach his top velocity of 2.50 m/s? (c) Discuss
which premises are inconsistent?
whether water resistance seems to increase
linearly with velocity.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 339
7 • Problems & Exercises 321
67. Construct Your Own Problem 70. Critical ThinkingTwo boxes of the same mass are
Consider a person climbing and descending stairs. pressed against pistons that compress and
Construct a problem in which you calculate the release the boxes on frictionless surfaces. Box A’s
long-term rate at which stairs can be climbed piston has a constant force F over a distancex
considering the mass of the person, his ability to before the box is released while box B starts at
generate power with his legs, and the height of a zero force and increases linearly to a force of 2F
single stair step. Also consider why the same before releasing the box at a distance of 1/2d. (a)
person can descend stairs at a faster rate for a Which of these boxes has the greatest speed after
nearly unlimited time in spite of the fact that very releasing from the piston? (b) Based on
similar forces are exerted going down as going up. experimental data for trials similar to box A, an
(This points to a fundamentally different process equation that fits the data is suggested for the
for descending versus climbing stairs.) change in kinetic energy, , which may not be
68. Construct Your Own Problem correct: , whereKis a
Consider humans generating electricity by constant with appropriate units,Fis the applied
pedaling a device similar to a stationary bicycle. force, andxis the distance the piston moves in
Construct a problem in which you determine the contact with the box. Is this equation consistent
number of people it would take to replace a large with your answer from part a? Explain why or why
electrical generation facility. Among the things to not. Does this equation make sense? Explain why
consider are the power output that is reasonable or why not. (c) If the applied force of the piston is
using the legs, rest time, and the need for proportional to the distance in contact with the
electricity 24 hours per day. Discuss the practical box, graph the work done on the box vs. the
implications of your results. distance in contact with the piston and box.
69. Integrated Concepts
A 105-kg basketball player crouches down 0.400
m while waiting to jump. After exerting a force on
the floor through this 0.400 m, their feet leave the
floor and their center of gravity rises 0.950 m
above its normal standing erect position. (a) Using
energy considerations, calculate the player's
velocity when they leave the floor. (b) What
average force did the player exert on the floor? (Do
not neglect the force to support their weight as
well as that to accelerate them.) (c) What was the
player's power output during the acceleration
phase?
PAGE: 340
322 7 • Problems & Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 341
CHAPTER 8
Linear Momentum and Collisions
FIGURE8.1Each rugby player has great momentum, which will affect the outcome of their collisions with each other and the ground.
(credit: ozzzie, Flickr)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
8.1Linear Momentum and Force
8.2Impulse
8.3Conservation of Momentum
8.4Elastic Collisions in One Dimension
8.5Inelastic Collisions in One Dimension
8.6Collisions of Point Masses in Two Dimensions
8.7Introduction to Rocket Propulsion
INTRODUCTION TO LINEAR MOMENTUM AND COLLISIONS We use the term momentum in various ways in
everyday language, and most of these ways are consistent with its precise scientific definition. We speak of sports
teams or politicians gaining and maintaining the momentum to win. We also recognize that momentum has
something to do with collisions. For example, looking at the rugby players in the photograph colliding and falling to
the ground, we expect their momenta to have great effects in the resulting collisions. Generally, momentum implies
a tendency to continue on course—to move in the same direction—and is associated with great mass and speed.
Momentum, like energy, is important because it is conserved. Only a few physical quantities are conserved in nature,
PAGE: 342
324 8 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
and studying them yields fundamental insight into how nature works, as we shall see in our study of momentum.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/8-introduction-to-linear-momentum-
and-collisions)
8.1 Linear Momentum and Force
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define linear momentum.
• Explain the relationship between momentum and force.
• State Newton’s second law of motion in terms of momentum.
• Calculate momentum given mass and velocity.
Linear Momentum
The scientific definition of linear momentum is consistent with most people’s intuitive understanding of momentum:
a large, fast-moving object has greater momentum than a smaller, slower object.Linear momentumis defined as
the product of a system’s mass multiplied by its velocity. In symbols, linear momentum is expressed as
8.1
Momentum is directly proportional to the object’s mass and also its velocity. Thus the greater an object’s mass or
the greater its velocity, the greater its momentum. Momentum is a vector having the same direction as the velocity
. The SI unit for momentum is .
Linear Momentum
Linear momentum is defined as the product of a system’s mass multiplied by its velocity:
8.2
EXAMPLE 8.1
Calculating Momentum: A Football Player and a Football
(a) Calculate the momentum of a 110-kg football player running at 8.00 m/s. (b) Compare the player’s momentum
with the momentum of a hard-thrown 0.410-kg football that has a speed of 25.0 m/s.
Strategy
No information is given regarding direction, and so we can calculate only the magnitude of the momentum, . (As
usual, a symbol that is in italics is a magnitude, whereas one that is italicized, boldfaced, and has an arrow is a
vector.) In both parts of this example, the magnitude of momentum can be calculated directly from the definition of
momentum given in the equation, which becomes
8.3
when only magnitudes are considered.
Solution for (a)
To determine the momentum of the player, substitute the known values for the player’s mass and speed into the
equation.
8.4
Solution for (b)
To determine the momentum of the ball, substitute the known values for the ball’s mass and speed into the
equation.
8.5
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 343
8.1 • Linear Momentum and Force 325
The ratio of the player’s momentum to that of the ball is
8.6
Discussion
Although the ball has greater velocity, the player has a much greater mass. Thus the momentum of the player is
much greater than the momentum of the football, as you might guess. As a result, the player’s motion is only slightly
affected if he catches the ball. We shall quantify what happens in such collisions in terms of momentum in later
sections.
Momentum and Newton’s Second Law
The importance of momentum, unlike the importance of energy, was recognized early in the development of
classical physics. Momentum was deemed so important that it was called the “quantity of motion.” Newton actually
stated hissecond law of motionin terms of momentum: The net external force equals the change in momentum of
a system divided by the time over which it changes. Using symbols, this law is
8.7
where is the net external force, is the change in momentum, and is the change in time.
Newton’s Second Law of Motion in Terms of Momentum
The net external force equals the change in momentum of a system divided by the time over which it changes.
8.8
Making Connections: Force and Momentum
Force and momentum are intimately related. Force acting over time can change momentum, and Newton’s
second law of motion, can be stated in its most broadly applicable form in terms of momentum. Momentum
continues to be a key concept in the study of atomic and subatomic particles in quantum mechanics.
This statement of Newton’s second law of motion includes the more familiar as a special case. We can
derive this form as follows. First, note that the change in momentum is given by
8.9
If the mass of the system is constant, then
8.10
So that for constant mass, Newton’s second law of motion becomes
8.11
Because , we get the familiar equation
8.12
when the mass of the system is constant.
Newton’s second law of motion stated in terms of momentum is more generally applicable because it can be applied
to systems where the mass is changing, such as rockets, as well as to systems of constant mass. We will consider
systems with varying mass in some detail;however, the relationship between momentum and force remains useful
PAGE: 344
326 8 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
when mass is constant, such as in the following example.
EXAMPLE 8.2
Calculating Force: Venus Williams’ Racquet
During the 2007 French Open, Venus Williams hit the fastest recorded serve in a premier women’s match, reaching a
speed of 58 m/s (209 km/h). What is the average force exerted on the 0.057-kg tennis ball by Venus Williams’
racquet, assuming that the ball’s speed just after impact is 58 m/s, that the initial horizontal component of the
velocity before impact is negligible, and that the ball remained in contact with the racquet for 5.0 ms (milliseconds)?
Strategy
This problem involves only one dimension because the ball starts from having no horizontal velocity component
before impact. Newton’s second law stated in terms of momentum is then written as
8.13
As noted above, when mass is constant, the change in momentum is given by
8.14
In this example, the velocity just after impact and the change in time are given; thus, once is calculated,
can be used to find the force.
Solution
To determine the change in momentum, substitute the values for the initial and final velocities into the equation
above.
8.15
Now the magnitude of the net external force can determined by using :
8.16
where we have retained only two significant figures in the final step.
Discussion
This quantity was the average force exerted by Venus Williams’ racquet on the tennis ball during its brief impact
(note that the ball also experienced the 0.56-N force of gravity, but that force was not due to the racquet). This
problem could also be solved by first finding the acceleration and then using , but one additional step
would be required compared with the strategy used in this example.
8.2 Impulse
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define impulse.
• Describe effects of impulses in everyday life.
• Determine the average effective force using graphical representation.
• Calculate average force and impulse given mass, velocity, and time.
The effect of a force on an object depends on how long it acts, as well as how great the force is. InExample 8.1, a
very large force acting for a short time had a great effect on the momentum of the tennis ball. A small force could
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 345
8.2 • Impulse 327
cause the samechange in momentum, but it would have to act for a much longer time. For example, if the ball were
thrown upward, the gravitational force (which is much smaller than the tennis racquet’s force) would eventually
reverse the momentum of the ball. Quantitatively, the effect we are talking about is the change in momentum .
By rearranging the equation to be
8.17
we can see how the change in momentum equals the average net external force multiplied by the time this force
acts. The quantity is given the nameimpulse. Impulse is the same as the change in momentum.
Impulse: Change in Momentum
Change in momentum equals the average net external force multiplied by the time this force acts.
8.18
The quantity is given the name impulse.
There are many ways in which an understanding of impulse can save lives, or at least limbs. The dashboard
padding in a car, and certainly the airbags, allow the net force on the occupants in the car to act over a much
longer time when there is a sudden stop. The momentum change is the same for an occupant, whether an air
bag is deployed or not, but the force (to bring the occupant to a stop) will be much less if it acts over a larger
time. Cars today have many plastic components. One advantage of plastics is their lighter weight, which results
in better gas mileage. Another advantage is that a car will crumple in a collision, especially in the event of a
head-on collision. A longer collision time means the force on the car will be less. Deaths during car races
decreased dramatically when the rigid frames of racing cars were replaced with parts that could crumple or
collapse in the event of an accident.
Bones in a body will fracture if the force on them is too large. If you jump onto the floor from a table, the force on
your legs can be immense if you land stiff-legged on a hard surface. Rolling on the ground after jumping from the
table, or landing with a parachute, extends the time over which the force (on you from the ground) acts.
EXAMPLE 8.3
Calculating Magnitudes of Impulses: Two Billiard Balls Striking a Rigid Wall
Two identical billiard balls strike a rigid wall with the same speed, and are reflected without any change of speed.
The first ball strikes perpendicular to the wall. The second ball strikes the wall at an angle of from the
perpendicular, and bounces off at an angle of from perpendicular to the wall.
(a) Determine the direction of the force on the wall due to each ball.
(b) Calculate the ratio of the magnitudes of impulses on the two balls by the wall.
Strategy for (a)
In order to determine the force on the wall, consider the force on the ball due to the wall using Newton’s second law
and then apply Newton’s third law to determine the direction. Assume the -axis to be normal to the wall and to be
positive in the initial direction of motion. Choose the -axis to be along the wall in the plane of the second ball’s
motion. The momentum direction and the velocity direction are the same.
Solution for (a)
The first ball bounces directly into the wall and exerts a force on it in the direction. Therefore the wall exerts a
force on the ball in the direction. The second ball continues with the same momentum component in the
direction, but reverses its -component of momentum, as seen by sketching a diagram of the angles involved and
keeping in mind the proportionality between velocity and momentum.
PAGE: 346
328 8 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
These changes mean the change in momentum for both balls is in the direction, so the force of the wall on each
ball is along the direction.
Strategy for (b)
Calculate the change in momentum for each ball, which is equal to the impulse imparted to the ball.
Solution for (b)
Let be the speed of each ball before and after collision with the wall, and the mass of each ball. Choose the
-axis and -axis as previously described,and consider the change inmomentum of the first ball which strikes
perpendicular to the wall.
8.19
8.20
Impulse is the change in momentum vector. Therefore the -component of impulse is equal to and the
-component of impulse is equal to zero.
Now consider the change in momentum of the second ball.
8.21
8.22
It should be noted here that while changes sign after the collision, does not. Therefore the -component of
impulse is equal to and the -component of impulse is equal to zero.
The ratio of the magnitudes of the impulse imparted to the balls is
8.23
Discussion
The direction of impulse and force is the same as in the case of (a); it is normal to the wall and along the negative
-direction. Making use of Newton’s third law, the force on the wall due to each ball is normal to the wall along the
positive -direction.
Our definition of impulse includes an assumption that the force is constant over the time interval .Forces are
usually not constant. Forces vary considerably even during the brief time intervals considered. It is, however,
possible to find an average effective force that produces the same result as the corresponding time-varying
force.Figure 8.2shows a graph of what an actual force looks like as a function of time for a ball bouncing off the
floor. The area under the curve has units of momentum and is equal to the impulse or change in momentum
between times and . That area is equal to the area inside the rectangle bounded by , , and . Thus the
impulses and their effects are the same for both the actual and effective forces.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 347
8.3 • Conservation of Momentum 329
FIGURE8.2A graph of force versus time with time along the -axis and force along the -axis for an actual force and an equivalent
effective force. The areas under the two curves are equal.
Making Connections: Take-Home Investigation—Hand Movement and Impulse
Try catching a ball while “giving” with the ball, pulling your hands toward your body. Then, try catching a ball
while keeping your hands still. Hit water in a tub with your full palm. After the water has settled, hit the water
again by diving your hand with your fingers first into the water. (Your full palm represents a swimmer doing a
belly flop and your diving hand represents a swimmer doing a dive.) Explain what happens in each case and why.
Which orientations would you advise people to avoid and why?
Making Connections: Constant Force and Constant Acceleration
The assumption of a constant force in the definition of impulse is analogous to the assumption of a constant
acceleration in kinematics. In both cases, nature is adequately described without the use of calculus.
8.3 Conservation of Momentum
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the principle of conservation of momentum.
• Derive an expression for the conservation of momentum.
• Explain conservation of momentum with examples.
• Explain the principle of conservation of momentum as it relates to atomic and subatomic particles.
Momentum is an important quantity because it is conserved. Yet it was not conserved in the examples inImpulse
andLinear Momentum and Force, where large changes in momentum were produced by forces acting on the system
of interest. Under what circumstances is momentum conserved?
The answer to this question entails considering a sufficiently large system. It is always possible to find a larger
system in which total momentum is constant, even if momentum changes for components of the system. If a
football player runs into the goalpost in the end zone, there will be a force on him that causes him to bounce
backward. However, the Earth also recoils —conserving momentum—because of the force applied to it through the
goalpost. Because Earth is many orders of magnitude more massive than the player, its recoil is immeasurably small
and can be neglected in any practical sense, but it is real nevertheless.
Consider what happens if the masses of two colliding objects are more similar than the masses of a football player
and Earth—for example, one car bumping into another, as shown inFigure 8.3. Both cars are coasting in the same
direction when the lead car (labeled is bumped by the trailing car (labeled The only unbalanced force on
each car is the force of the collision. (Assume that the effects due to friction are negligible.) Car 1 slows down as a
result of the collision, losing some momentum, while car 2 speeds up and gains some momentum. We shall now
show that the total momentum of the two-car system remains constant.
PAGE: 348
330 8 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
FIGURE8.3A car of mass moving with a velocity of bumps into another car of mass and velocity that it is following. As a
result, the first car slows down to a velocity of and the second speeds up to a velocity of . The momentum of each car is changed,
but the total momentum of the two cars is the same before and after the collision (if you assume friction is negligible).
Using the definition of impulse, the change in momentum of car 1 is given by
8.24
where is the force on car 1 due to car 2, and is the time the force acts (the duration of the collision).
Intuitively, it seems obvious that the collision time is the same for both cars, but it is only true for objects traveling at
ordinary speeds. This assumption must be modified for objects travelling near the speed of light, without affecting
the result that momentum is conserved.
Similarly, the change in momentum of car 2 is
8.25
where is the force on car 2 due to car 1, and we assume the duration of the collision is the same for both cars.
We know from Newton’s third law that , and so
8.26
Thus, the changes in momentum are equal and opposite, and
8.27
Because the changes in momentum add to zero, the total momentum of the two-car system is constant. That is,
8.28
8.29
where and are the momenta of cars 1 and 2 after the collision. (We often use primes to denote the final
state.)
This result—that momentum is conserved—has validity far beyond the preceding one-dimensional case. It can be
similarly shown that total momentum is conserved for any isolated system, with any number of objects in it. In
equation form, theconservation of momentum principlefor an isolated system is written
8.30
or
8.31
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 349
8.3 • Conservation of Momentum 331
where is the total momentum (the sum of the momenta of the individual objects in the system) and is the
total momentum some time later. (The total momentum can be shown to be the momentum of the center of mass of
the system.) Anisolated systemis defined to be one for which the net external force is zero
Conservation of Momentum Principle
8.32
Isolated System
An isolated system is defined to be one for which the net external force is zero
Perhaps an easier way to see that momentum is conserved for an isolated system is to consider Newton’s second
law in terms of momentum, . For an isolated system, ; thus, , and is constant.
We have noted that the three length dimensions in nature— , , and —are independent, and it is interesting to note
that momentum can be conserved in different ways along each dimension. For example, during projectile motion
and where air resistance is negligible, momentum is conserved in the horizontal direction because horizontal forces
are zero and momentum is unchanged. But along the vertical direction, the net vertical force is not zero and the
momentum of the projectile is not conserved. (SeeFigure 8.4.) However, if the momentum of the projectile-Earth
system is considered in the vertical direction, we find that the total momentum is conserved.
FIGURE8.4The horizontal component of a projectile’s momentum is conserved if air resistance is negligible, even in this case where a
space probe separates. The forces causing the separation are internal to the system, so that the net external horizontal force is still
zero. The vertical component of the momentum is not conserved, because the net vertical force is not zero. In the vertical direction,
the space probe-Earth system needs to be considered and we find that the total momentum is conserved. The center of mass of the space
probe takes the same path it would if the separation did not occur.
The conservation of momentum principle can be applied to systems as different as a comet striking Earth and a gas
containing huge numbers of atoms and molecules. Conservation of momentum is violated only when the net
external force is not zero. But another larger system can always be considered in which momentum is conserved by
simply including the source of the external force. For example, in the collision of two cars considered above, the
two-car system conserves momentum while each one-car system does not.
PAGE: 350
332 8 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
Making Connections: Take-Home Investigation—Drop of Tennis Ball and a
Basketball
Hold a tennis ball side by side and in contact with a basketball. Drop the balls together. (Be careful!) What
happens? Explain your observations. Now hold the tennis ball above and in contact with the basketball. What
happened? Explain your observations. What do you think will happen if the basketball ball is held above and in
contact with the tennis ball?
Making Connections: Take-Home Investigation—Two Tennis Balls in a Ballistic
Trajectory
Tie two tennis balls together with a string about a foot long. Hold one ball and let the other hang down and throw
it in a ballistic trajectory. Explain your observations. Now mark the center of the string with bright ink or attach a
brightly colored sticker to it and throw again. What happened? Explain your observations.
Some aquatic animals such as jellyfish move around based on the principles of conservation of momentum. A
jellyfish fills its umbrella section with water and then pushes the water out resulting in motion in the opposite
direction to that of the jet of water. Squids propel themselves in a similar manner but, in contrast with jellyfish,
are able to control the direction in which they move by aiming their nozzle forward or backward. Typical squids
can move at speeds of 8 to 12 km/h.
The ballistocardiograph (BCG) was a diagnostic tool used in the second half of the 20th century to study the
strength of the heart. About once a second, your heart beats, forcing blood into the aorta. A force in the opposite
direction is exerted on the rest of your body (recall Newton’s third law). A ballistocardiograph is a device that can
measure this reaction force. This measurement is done by using a sensor (resting on the person) or by using a
moving table suspended from the ceiling. This technique can gather information on the strength of the heart
beat and the volume of blood passing from the heart. However, the electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG) and the
echocardiogram (cardiac ECHO or ECHO; a technique that uses ultrasound to see an image of the heart) are
more widely used in the practice of cardiology.
Making Connections: Conservation of Momentum and Collision
Conservation of momentum is quite useful in describing collisions. Momentum is crucial to our understanding of
atomic and subatomic particles because much of what we know about these particles comes from collision
experiments.
Subatomic Collisions and Momentum
The conservation of momentum principle not only applies to the macroscopic objects, it is also essential to our
explorations of atomic and subatomic particles. Giant machines hurl subatomic particles at one another, and
researchers evaluate the results by assuming conservation of momentum (among other things).
On the small scale, we find that particles and their properties are invisible to the naked eye but can be measured
with our instruments, and models of these subatomic particles can be constructed to describe the results.
Momentum is found to be a property of all subatomic particles including massless particles such as photons that
compose light. Momentum being a property of particles hints that momentum may have an identity beyond the
description of an object’s mass multiplied by the object’s velocity. Indeed, momentum relates to wave properties
and plays a fundamental role in what measurements are taken and how we take these measurements. Furthermore,
we find that the conservation of momentum principle is valid when considering systems of particles. We use this
principle to analyze the masses and other properties of previously undetected particles, such as the nucleus of an
atom and the existence of quarks that make up particles of nuclei.Figure 8.5below illustrates how a particle
scattering backward from another implies that its target is massive and dense. Experiments seeking evidence that
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 351
8.4 • Elastic Collisions in One Dimension 333
quarksmake up protons (one type of particle that makes up nuclei) scattered high-energy electrons off of protons
(nuclei of hydrogen atoms). Electrons occasionally scattered straight backward in a manner that implied a very small
and very dense particle makes up the proton—this observation is considered nearly direct evidence of quarks. The
analysis was based partly on the same conservation of momentum principle that works so well on the large scale.
FIGURE8.5A subatomic particle scatters straight backward from a target particle. In experiments seeking evidence for quarks, electrons
were observed to occasionally scatter straight backward from a proton.
8.4 Elastic Collisions in One Dimension
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe an elastic collision of two objects in one dimension.
• Define internal kinetic energy.
• Derive an expression for conservation of internal kinetic energy in a one dimensional collision.
• Determine the final velocities in an elastic collision given masses and initial velocities.
Let us consider various types of two-object collisions. These collisions are the easiest to analyze, and they illustrate
many of the physical principles involved in collisions. The conservation of momentum principle is very useful here,
and it can be used whenever the net external force on a system is zero.
We start with the elastic collision of two objects moving along the same line—a one-dimensional problem. Anelastic
collisionis one that also conserves internal kinetic energy.Internal kinetic energyis the sum of the kinetic
energies of the objects in the system.Figure 8.6illustrates an elastic collision in which internal kinetic energy and
momentum are conserved.
Truly elastic collisions can only be achieved with subatomic particles, such as electrons striking nuclei. Macroscopic
collisions can be very nearly, but not quite, elastic—some kinetic energy is always converted into other forms of
energy such as heat transfer due to friction and sound. One macroscopic collision that is nearly elastic is that of two
steel blocks on ice. Another nearly elastic collision is that between two carts with spring bumpers on an air track. Icy
surfaces and air tracks are nearly frictionless, more readily allowing nearly elastic collisions on them.
Elastic Collision
Anelastic collisionis one that conserves internal kinetic energy.
Internal Kinetic Energy
Internal kinetic energyis the sum of the kinetic energies of the objects in the system.
PAGE: 352
334 8 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
FIGURE8.6An elastic one-dimensional two-object collision. Momentum and internal kinetic energy are conserved.
Now, to solve problems involving one-dimensional elastic collisions between two objects we can use the equations
for conservation of momentum and conservation of internal kinetic energy. First, the equation for conservation of
momentum for two objects in a one-dimensional collision is
8.33
or
8.34
where the primes (') indicate values after the collision. By definition, an elastic collision conserves internal kinetic
energy, and so the sum of kinetic energies before the collision equals the sum after the collision. Thus,
8.35
expresses the equation for conservation of internal kinetic energy in a one-dimensional collision.
EXAMPLE 8.4
Calculating Velocities Following an Elastic Collision
Calculate the velocities of two objects following an elastic collision, given that
8.36
Strategy and Concept
First, visualize what the initial conditions mean—a small object strikes a larger object that is initially at rest. This
situation is slightly simpler than the situation shown inFigure 8.6where both objects are initially moving. We are
asked to find two unknowns (the final velocities and ). To find two unknowns, we must use two independent
equations. Because this collision is elastic, we can use the above two equations. Both can be simplified by the fact
that object 2 is initially at rest, and thus . Once we simplify these equations, we combine them algebraically
to solve for the unknowns.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 353
8.4 • Elastic Collisions in One Dimension 335
Solution
For this problem, note that and use conservation of momentum. Thus,
8.37
or
8.38
Using conservation of internal kinetic energy and that ,
8.39
Solving the first equation (momentum equation) for , we obtain
8.40
Substituting this expression into the second equation (internal kinetic energy equation) eliminates the variable ,
leaving only as an unknown (the algebra is left as an exercise for the reader). There are two solutions to any
quadratic equation; in this example, they are
8.41
and
8.42
As noted when quadratic equations were encountered in earlier chapters, both solutions may or may not be
meaningful. In this case, the first solution is the same as the initial condition. The first solution thus represents the
situation before the collision and is discarded. The second solution is negative, meaning that the
first object bounces backward. When this negative value of is used to find the velocity of the second object after
the collision, we get
8.43
or
8.44
Discussion
The result of this example is intuitively reasonable. A small object strikes a larger one at rest and bounces backward.
The larger one is knocked forward, but with a low speed. (This is like a compact car bouncing backward off a full-size
SUV that is initially at rest.) As a check, try calculating the internal kinetic energy before and after the collision. You
will see that the internal kinetic energy is unchanged at 4.00 J. Also check the total momentum before and after the
collision; you will find it, too, is unchanged.
The equations for conservation of momentum and internal kinetic energy as written above can be used to describe
any one-dimensional elastic collision of two objects. These equations can be extended to more objects if needed.
Making Connections: Take-Home Investigation—Ice Cubes and Elastic Collision
Find a few ice cubes which are about the same size and a smooth kitchen tabletop or a table with a glass top.
Place the ice cubes on the surface several centimeters away from each other. Flick one ice cube toward a
stationary ice cube and observe the path and velocities of the ice cubes after the collision. Try to avoid edge-on
collisions and collisions with rotating ice cubes. Have you created approximately elastic collisions? Explain the
speeds and directions of the ice cubes using momentum.
PAGE: 354
336 8 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Collision Lab
Investigate collisions on an air hockey table. Set up your own experiments: vary the number of discs, masses and
initial conditions. Is momentum conserved? Is kinetic energy conserved? Vary the elasticity and see what happens.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/8-4-elastic-collisions-in-one-
dimension)
8.5 Inelastic Collisions in One Dimension
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define inelastic collision.
• Explain perfectly inelastic collision.
• Apply an understanding of collisions to sports.
• Determine recoil velocity and loss in kinetic energy given mass and initial velocity.
We have seen that in an elastic collision, internal kinetic energy is conserved. Aninelastic collisionis one in which
the internal kinetic energy changes (it is not conserved). This lack of conservation means that the forces between
colliding objects may remove or add internal kinetic energy. Work done by internal forces may change the forms of
energy within a system. For inelastic collisions, such as when colliding objects stick together, this internal work may
transform some internal kinetic energy into heat transfer. Or it may convert stored energy into internal kinetic
energy, such as when exploding bolts separate a satellite from its launch vehicle.
Inelastic Collision
An inelastic collision is one in which the internal kinetic energy changes (it is not conserved).
Figure 8.7shows an example of an inelastic collision. Two objects that have equal masses head toward one another
at equal speeds and then stick together. Their total internal kinetic energy is initially . The
two objects come to rest after sticking together, conserving momentum. But the internal kinetic energy is zero after
the collision. A collision in which the objects stick together is sometimes called aperfectly inelastic collision
because it reduces internal kinetic energy more than does any other type of inelastic collision. In fact, such a
collision reduces internal kinetic energy to the minimum it can have while still conserving momentum.
Perfectly Inelastic Collision
A collision in which the objects stick together is sometimes called “perfectly inelastic.”
FIGURE8.7An inelastic one-dimensional two-object collision. Momentum is conserved, but internal kinetic energy is not conserved. (a)
Two objects of equal mass initially head directly toward one another at the same speed. (b) The objects stick together (a perfectly inelastic
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 355
8.5 • Inelastic Collisions in One Dimension 337
collision), and so their final velocity is zero. The internal kinetic energy of the system changes in any inelastic collision and is reduced to
zero in this example.
EXAMPLE 8.5
Calculating Velocity and Change in Kinetic Energy: Inelastic Collision of a Puck and a Goalie
(a) Find the recoil velocity of a 70.0-kg ice hockey goalie, originally at rest, who catches a 0.150-kg hockey puck
slapped at him at a velocity of 35.0 m/s. (b) How much kinetic energy is lost during the collision? Assume friction
between the ice and the puck-goalie system is negligible. (SeeFigure 8.8)
FIGURE8.8An ice hockey goalie catches a hockey puck and recoils backward. The initial kinetic energy of the puck is almost entirely
converted to thermal energy and sound in this inelastic collision.
Strategy
Momentum is conserved because the net external force on the puck-goalie system is zero. We can thus use
conservation of momentum to find the final velocity of the puck and goalie system. Note that the initial velocity of
the goalie is zero and that the final velocity of the puck and goalie are the same. Once the final velocity is found, the
kinetic energies can be calculated before and after the collision and compared as requested.
Solution for (a)
Momentum is conserved because the net external force on the puck-goalie system is zero.
Conservation of momentum is
8.45
or
8.46
Because the goalie is initially at rest, we know . Because the goalie catches the puck, the final velocities are
equal, or . Thus, the conservation of momentum equation simplifies to
8.47
Solving for yields
8.48
Entering known values in this equation, we get
8.49
Discussion for (a)
This recoil velocity is small and in the same direction as the puck’s original velocity, as we might expect.
PAGE: 356
338 8 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
Solution for (b)
Before the collision, the internal kinetic energy of the system is that of the hockey puck, because the goalie is
initially at rest. Therefore, is initially
8.50
After the collision, the internal kinetic energy is
8.51
The change in internal kinetic energy is thus
8.52
where the minus sign indicates that the energy was lost.
Discussion for (b)
Nearly all of the initial internal kinetic energy is lost in this perfectly inelastic collision. is mostly converted to
thermal energy and sound.
During some collisions, the objects do not stick together and less of the internal kinetic energy is removed—such as
happens in most automobile accidents. Alternatively, stored energy may be converted into internal kinetic energy
during a collision.Figure 8.9shows a one-dimensional example in which two carts on an air track collide, releasing
potential energy from a compressed spring.Example 8.6deals with data from such a collision.
FIGURE8.9An air track is nearly frictionless, so that momentum is conserved. Motion is one-dimensional. In this collision, examined in
Example 8.6, the potential energy of a compressed spring is released during the collision and is converted to internal kinetic energy.
Collisions are particularly important in sports and the sporting and leisure industry utilizes elastic and inelastic
collisions. Let us look briefly at tennis. Recall that in a collision, it is momentum and not force that is important. So, a
heavier tennis racquet will have the advantage over a lighter one. This conclusion also holds true for other sports—a
lightweight bat (such as a softball bat) cannot hit a hardball very far.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 357
8.5 • Inelastic Collisions in One Dimension 339
The location of the impact of the tennis ball on the racquet is also important, as is the part of the stroke during which
the impact occurs. A smooth motion results in the maximizing of the velocity of the ball after impact and reduces
sports injuries such as tennis elbow. A tennis player tries to hit the ball on the “sweet spot” on the racquet, where
the vibration and impact are minimized and the ball is able to be given more velocity. Sports science and
technologies also use physics concepts such as momentum and rotational motion and vibrations.
Take-Home Experiment—Bouncing of Tennis Ball
1. Find a racquet (a tennis, badminton, or other racquet will do). Place the racquet on the floor and stand on
the handle. Drop a tennis ball on the strings from a measured height. Measure how high the ball bounces.
Now ask a friend to hold the racquet firmly by the handle and drop a tennis ball from the same measured
height above the racquet. Measure how high the ball bounces and observe what happens to your friend’s
hand during the collision. Explain your observations and measurements.
2. The coefficient of restitution is a measure of the elasticity of a collision between a ball and an object, and
is defined as the ratio of the speeds after and before the collision. A perfectly elastic collision has a of 1.
For a ball bouncing off the floor (or a racquet on the floor), can be shown to be where is the
height to which the ball bounces and is the height from which the ball is dropped. Determine for the
cases in Part 1 and for the case of a tennis ball bouncing off a concrete or wooden floor ( for new
tennis balls used on a tennis court).
EXAMPLE 8.6
Calculating Final Velocity and Energy Release: Two Carts Collide
In the collision pictured inFigure 8.9, two carts collide inelastically. Cart 1 (denoted carries a spring which is
initially compressed. During the collision, the spring releases its potential energy and converts it to internal kinetic
energy. The mass of cart 1 and the spring is 0.350 kg, and the cart and the spring together have an initial velocity of
. Cart 2 (denoted inFigure 8.9) has a mass of 0.500 kg and an initial velocity of . After the
collision, cart 1 is observed to recoil with a velocity of . (a) What is the final velocity of cart 2? (b) How
much energy was released by the spring (assuming all of it was converted into internal kinetic energy)?
Strategy
We can use conservation of momentum to find the final velocity of cart 2, because (the track is frictionless
and the force of the spring is internal). Once this velocity is determined, we can compare the internal kinetic energy
before and after the collision to see how much energy was released by the spring.
Solution for (a)
As before, the equation for conservation of momentum in a two-object system is
8.53
The only unknown in this equation is . Solving for and substituting known values into the previous equation
yields
8.54
Solution for (b)
The internal kinetic energy before the collision is
PAGE: 358
340 8 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
8.55
After the collision, the internal kinetic energy is
8.56
The change in internal kinetic energy is thus
8.57
Discussion
The final velocity of cart 2 is large and positive, meaning that it is moving to the right after the collision. The internal
kinetic energy in this collision increases by 5.46 J. That energy was released by the spring.
8.6 Collisions of Point Masses in Two Dimensions
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Discuss two dimensional collisions as an extension of one dimensional analysis.
• Define point masses.
• Derive an expression for conservation of momentum alongx-axis andy-axis.
• Describe elastic collisions of two objects with equal mass.
• Determine the magnitude and direction of the final velocity given initial velocity, and scattering angle.
In the previous two sections, we considered only one-dimensional collisions; during such collisions, the incoming
and outgoing velocities are all along the same line. But what about collisions, such as those between billiard balls, in
which objects scatter to the side? These are two-dimensional collisions, and we shall see that their study is an
extension of the one-dimensional analysis already presented. The approach taken (similar to the approach in
discussing two-dimensional kinematics and dynamics) is to choose a convenient coordinate system and resolve the
motion into components along perpendicular axes. Resolving the motion yields a pair of one-dimensional problems
to be solved simultaneously.
One complication arising in two-dimensional collisions is that the objects might rotate before or after their collision.
For example, if two ice skaters hook arms as they pass by one another, they will spin in circles. We will not consider
such rotation until later, and so for now we arrange things so that no rotation is possible. To avoid rotation, we
consider only the scattering ofpoint masses—that is, structureless particles that cannot rotate or spin.
We start by assuming that , so that momentum is conserved. The simplest collision is one in which one of
the particles is initially at rest. (SeeFigure 8.10.) The best choice for a coordinate system is one with an axis parallel
to the velocity of the incoming particle, as shown inFigure 8.10. Because momentum is conserved, the components
of momentum along the - and -axes will also be conserved, but with the chosen coordinate system,
is initially zero and is the momentum of the incoming particle. Both facts simplify the analysis. (Even with the
simplifying assumptions of point masses, one particle initially at rest, and a convenient coordinate system, we still
gain new insights into nature from the analysis of two-dimensional collisions.)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 359
8.6 • Collisions of Point Masses in Two Dimensions 341
FIGURE8.10A two-dimensional collision with the coordinate system chosen so that is initially at rest and is parallel to the -axis.
This coordinate system is sometimes called the laboratory coordinate system, because many scattering experiments have a target that is
stationary in the laboratory, while particles are scattered from it to determine the particles that make-up the target and how they are bound
together. The particles may not be observed directly, but their initial and final velocities are.
Along the -axis, the equation for conservation of momentum is
8.58
Where the subscripts denote the particles and axes and the primes denote the situation after the collision. In terms
of masses and velocities, this equation is
′ ′
8.59
But because particle 2 is initially at rest, this equation becomes
8.60
The components of the velocities along the -axis have the form . Because particle 1 initially moves along
the -axis, we find .
Conservation of momentum along the -axis gives the following equation:
8.61
where and are as shown inFigure 8.10.
Conservation of Momentum along the -axis
8.62
Along the -axis, the equation for conservation of momentum is
8.63
or
8.64
But is zero, because particle 1 initially moves along the -axis. Because particle 2 is initially at rest, is also
zero. The equation for conservation of momentum along the -axis becomes
8.65
The components of the velocities along the -axis have the form .
PAGE: 360
342 8 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
Thus, conservation of momentum along the -axis gives the following equation:
8.66
Conservation of Momentum along the -axis
8.67
The equations of conservation of momentum along the -axis and -axis are very useful in analyzing two-
dimensional collisions of particles, where one is originally stationary (a common laboratory situation). But two
equations can only be used to find two unknowns, and so other data may be necessary when collision experiments
are used to explore nature at the subatomic level.
EXAMPLE 8.7
Determining the Final Velocity of an Unseen Object from the Scattering of Another Object
Suppose the following experiment is performed. A 0.250-kg object is slid on a frictionless surface into a dark
room, where it strikes an initially stationary object with mass of 0.400 kg . The 0.250-kg object emerges from
the room at an angle of with its incoming direction.
The speed of the 0.250-kg object is originally 2.00 m/s and is 1.50 m/s after the collision. Calculate the magnitude
and direction of the velocity and of the 0.400-kg object after the collision.
Strategy
Momentum is conserved because the surface is frictionless. The coordinate system shown inFigure 8.11is one in
which is originally at rest and the initial velocity is parallel to the -axis, so that conservation of momentum
along the - and -axes is applicable.
Everything is known in these equations except and , which are precisely the quantities we wish to find. We can
find two unknowns because we have two independent equations: the equations describing the conservation of
momentum in the - and -directions.
Solution
Solving for and for and
taking the ratio yields an equation (in which θ is the only unknown quantity. Applying the identity ,
2
we obtain:
8.68
Entering known values into the previous equation gives
8.69
Thus,
8.70
Angles are defined as positive in the counter clockwise direction, so this angle indicates that is scattered to the
right inFigure 8.11, as expected (this angle is in the fourth quadrant). Either equation for the - or -axis can now be
used to solve for , but the latter equation is easiest because it has fewer terms.
8.71
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 361
8.6 • Collisions of Point Masses in Two Dimensions 343
Entering known values into this equation gives
8.72
Thus,
8.73
Discussion
It is instructive to calculate the internal kinetic energy of this two-object system before and after the collision. (This
calculation is left as an end-of-chapter problem.) If you do this calculation, you will find that the internal kinetic
energy is less after the collision, and so the collision is inelastic. This type of result makes a physicist want to
explore the system further.
FIGURE8.11A collision taking place in a dark room is explored inExample 8.7. The incoming object is scattered by an initially
stationary object. Only the stationary object’s mass is known. By measuring the angle and speed at which emerges from the room, it
is possible to calculate the magnitude and direction of the initially stationary object’s velocity after the collision.
Elastic Collisions of Two Objects with Equal Mass
Some interesting situations arise when the two colliding objects have equal mass and the collision is elastic. This
situation is nearly the case with colliding billiard balls, and precisely the case with some subatomic particle
collisions. We can thus get a mental image of a collision of subatomic particles by thinking about billiards (or pool).
(Refer toFigure 8.10for masses and angles.) First, an elastic collision conserves internal kinetic energy. Again, let us
assume object 2 is initially at rest. Then, the internal kinetic energy before and after the collision of two objects
that have equal masses is
8.74
Because the masses are equal, . Algebraic manipulation (left to the reader) of conservation of
momentum in the - and -directions can show that
8.75
(Remember that is negative here.) The two preceding equations can both be true only if
8.76
PAGE: 362
344 8 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
There are three ways that this term can be zero. They are
• : head-on collision; incoming ball stops
• : no collision; incoming ball continues unaffected
• : angle of separation is after the collision
All three of these ways are familiar occurrences in billiards and pool, although most of us try to avoid the second. If
you play enough pool, you will notice that the angle between the balls is very close to after the collision,
although it will vary from this value if a great deal of spin is placed on the ball. (Large spin carries in extra energy and
a quantity calledangular momentum, which must also be conserved.) The assumption that the scattering of billiard
balls is elastic is reasonable based on the correctness of the three results it produces. This assumption also implies
that, to a good approximation, momentum is conserved for the two-ball system in billiards and pool. The problems
below explore these and other characteristics of two-dimensional collisions.
Connections to Nuclear and Particle Physics
Two-dimensional collision experiments have revealed much of what we know about subatomic particles, as we
shall see inMedical Applications of Nuclear PhysicsandParticle Physics. Ernest Rutherford, for example,
discovered the nature of the atomic nucleus from such experiments.
8.7 Introduction to Rocket Propulsion
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• State Newton’s third law of motion.
• Explain the principle involved in propulsion of rockets and jet engines.
• Derive an expression for the acceleration of the rocket and discuss the factors that affect the
acceleration.
• Describe the function of a space shuttle.
Rockets range in size from fireworks so small that ordinary people use them to immense Saturn Vs that once
propelled massive payloads toward the Moon. The propulsion of all rockets, jet engines, deflating balloons, and even
squids and octopuses is explained by the same physical principle—Newton’s third law of motion. Matter is forcefully
ejected from a system, producing an equal and opposite reaction on what remains. Another common example is the
recoil of a gun. The gun exerts a force on a bullet to accelerate it and consequently experiences an equal and
opposite force, causing the gun’s recoil or kick.
Making Connections: Take-Home Experiment—Propulsion of a Balloon
Hold a balloon and fill it with air. Then, let the balloon go. In which direction does the air come out of the balloon
and in which direction does the balloon get propelled? If you fill the balloon with water and then let the balloon
go, does the balloon’s direction change? Explain your answer.
Figure 8.12shows a rocket accelerating straight up. In part (a), the rocket has a mass and a velocity relative to
Earth, and hence a momentum . In part (b), a time has elapsed in which the rocket has ejected a mass of
hot gas at a velocity relative to the rocket. The remainder of the mass now has a greater velocity
. The momentum of the entire system (rocket plus expelled gas) has actually decreased because the force
of gravity has acted for a time , producing a negative impulse . (Remember that impulse is the net
external force on a system multiplied by the time it acts, and it equals the change in momentum of the system.) So,
the center of mass of the system is in free fall but, by rapidly expelling mass, part of the system can accelerate
upward. It is a commonly held misconception that the rocket exhaust pushes on the ground. If we consider thrust;
that is, the force exerted on the rocket by the exhaust gases, then a rocket’s thrust is greater in outer space than in
the atmosphere or on the launch pad. In fact, gases are easier to expel into a vacuum.
By calculating the change in momentum for the entire system over , and equating this change to the impulse, the
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 363
8.7 • Introduction to Rocket Propulsion 345
following expression can be shown to be a good approximation for the acceleration of the rocket.
8.77
“The rocket” is that part of the system remaining after the gas is ejected, and is the acceleration due to gravity.
Acceleration of a Rocket
Acceleration of a rocket is
8.78
where is the acceleration of the rocket, is the exhaust velocity, is the mass of the rocket, is the mass
of the ejected gas, and is the time in which the gas is ejected.
FIGURE8.12(a) This rocket has a mass and an upward velocity . The net external force on the system is ,if air resistance is
neglected. (b) A time later the system has two main parts, the ejected gas and the remainder of the rocket. The reaction force on the
rocket is what overcomes the gravitational force and accelerates it upward.
A rocket’s acceleration depends on three major factors, consistent with the equation for acceleration of a rocket.
First, the greater the exhaust velocity of the gases relative to the rocket, , the greater the acceleration is. The
practical limit for is about for conventional (non-nuclear) hot-gas propulsion systems. The second
factor is the rate at which mass is ejected from the rocket. This is the factor in the equation. The quantity
, with units of newtons, is called "thrust.” The faster the rocket burns its fuel, the greater its thrust, and
the greater its acceleration. The third factor is the mass of the rocket. The smaller the mass is (all other factors
being the same), the greater the acceleration. The rocket mass decreases dramatically during flight because most
of the rocket is fuel to begin with, so that acceleration increases continuously, reaching a maximum just before the
fuel is exhausted.
PAGE: 364
346 8 • Linear Momentum and Collisions
Factors Affecting a Rocket’s Acceleration
• The greater the exhaust velocity of the gases relative to the rocket, the greater the acceleration.
• The faster the rocket burns its fuel, the greater its acceleration.
• The smaller the rocket’s mass (all other factors being the same), the greater the acceleration.
EXAMPLE 8.8
Calculating Acceleration: Initial Acceleration of a Moon Launch
A Saturn V’s mass at liftoff was , its fuel-burn rate was , and the exhaust velocity was
. Calculate its initial acceleration.
Strategy
This problem is a straightforward application of the expression for acceleration because is the unknown and all of
the terms on the right side of the equation are given.
Solution
Substituting the given values into the equation for acceleration yields
8.79
Discussion
This value is fairly small, even for an initial acceleration. The acceleration does increase steadily as the rocket burns
fuel, because decreases while and remain constant. Knowing this acceleration and the mass of the rocket,
you can show that the thrust of the engines was .
To achieve the high speeds needed to hop continents, obtain orbit, or escape Earth’s gravity altogether, the mass of
the rocket other than fuel must be as small as possible. It can be shown that, in the absence of air resistance and
neglecting gravity, the final velocity of a one-stage rocket initially at rest is
8.80
where is the natural logarithm of the ratio of the initial mass of the rocket to what is left after
all of the fuel is exhausted. (Note that is actually the change in velocity, so the equation can be used for any
segment of the flight. If we start from rest, the change in velocity equals the final velocity.) For example, let us
calculate the mass ratio needed to escape Earth’s gravity starting from rest, given that the escape velocity from
Earth is about , and assuming an exhaust velocity .
8.81
Solving for gives
8.82
Thus, the mass of the rocket is
8.83
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 365
8.7 • Introduction to Rocket Propulsion 347
This result means that only of the mass is left when the fuel is burnt, and of the initial mass was fuel.
Expressed as percentages, 98.9% of the rocket is fuel, while payload, engines, fuel tanks, and other components
make up only 1.10%. Taking air resistance and gravitational force into account, the mass remaining can only be
about . It is difficult to build a rocket in which the fuel has a mass 180 times everything else. The solution is
multistage rockets. Each stage only needs to achieve part of the final velocity and is discarded after it burns its fuel.
The result is that each successive stage can have smaller engines and more payload relative to its fuel. Once out of
the atmosphere, the ratio of payload to fuel becomes more favorable, too.
The space shuttle was an attempt at an economical vehicle with some reusable parts, such as the solid fuel
boosters and the craft itself. (SeeFigure 8.13) The shuttle’s need to be operated by humans, however, made it at
least as costly for launching satellites as expendable, unpiloted rockets. Ideally, the shuttle would only have been
used when human activities were required for the success of a mission, such as the repair of the Hubble space
telescope. Rockets with satellites can also be launched from airplanes. Using airplanes has the double advantage
that the initial velocity is significantly above zero and a rocket can avoid most of the atmosphere’s resistance.
FIGURE8.13The space shuttle had a number of reusable parts. Solid fuel boosters on either side were recovered and refueled after each
flight, and the entire orbiter returned to Earth for use in subsequent flights. The large liquid fuel tank was expended. The space shuttle was
a complex assemblage of technologies, employing both solid and liquid fuel and pioneering ceramic tiles as reentry heat shields. As a
result, it permitted multiple launches as opposed to single-use rockets. (credit: NASA)
PAGE: 366
348 8 • Glossary
Glossary
change in momentum the difference between the isolated system a system in which the net external
final and initial momentum; the mass times the force is zero
change in velocity linear momentum the product of mass and velocity
conservation of momentum principle when the net perfectly inelastic collision a collision in which the
external force is zero, the total momentum of the colliding objects stick together
system is conserved or constant point masses structureless particles with no rotation
elastic collision a collision that also conserves or spin
internal kinetic energy quark fundamental constituent of matter and an
impulse the average net external force times the time elementary particle
it acts; equal to the change in momentum second law of motion physical law that states that
inelastic collision a collision in which internal kinetic the net external force equals the change in
energy is not conserved momentum of a system divided by the time over
internal kinetic energy the sum of the kinetic which it changes
energies of the objects in a system
Section Summary
8.1Linear Momentum and Force total momentum some time later.
• An isolated system is defined to be one for which
• Linear momentum (momentumfor brevity) is
the net external force is zero
defined as the product of a system’s mass
• During projectile motion and where air resistance
multiplied by its velocity.
is negligible, momentum is conserved in the
• In symbols, linear momentum is defined to be
horizontal direction because horizontal forces are
zero.
where is the mass of the system and is its
• Conservation of momentum applies only when the
velocity.
net external force is zero.
• The SI unit for momentum is .
• The conservation of momentum principle is valid
• Newton’s second law of motion in terms of
when considering systems of particles.
momentum states that the net external force
equals the change in momentum of a system 8.4Elastic Collisions in One Dimension
divided by the time over which it changes.
• An elastic collision is one that conserves internal
• In symbols, Newton’s second law of motion is
kinetic energy.
defined to be
• Conservation of kinetic energy and momentum
together allow the final velocities to be calculated
in terms of initial velocities and masses in one
is the net external force, is the change in
dimensional two-body collisions.
momentum, and is the change time.
8.5Inelastic Collisions in One Dimension
8.2Impulse
• An inelastic collision is one in which the internal
• Impulse, or change in momentum, equals the
kinetic energy changes (it is not conserved).
average net external force multiplied by the time
• A collision in which the objects stick together is
this force acts:
sometimes called perfectly inelastic because it
reduces internal kinetic energy more than does
• Forces are usually not constant over a period of
any other type of inelastic collision.
time.
• Sports science and technologies also use physics
8.3Conservation of Momentum concepts such as momentum and rotational
motion and vibrations.
• The conservation of momentum principle is
written 8.6Collisions of Point Masses in Two
Dimensions
or
• The approach to two-dimensional collisions is to
choose a convenient coordinate system and break
is the initial total momentum and is the
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 367
8 • Conceptual Questions 349
the motion into components along perpendicular cannot spin.
axes. Choose a coordinate system with the -axis
8.7Introduction to Rocket Propulsion
parallel to the velocity of the incoming particle.
• Two-dimensional collisions of point masses where • Newton’s third law of motion states that to every
mass 2 is initially at rest conserve momentum action, there is an equal and opposite reaction.
along the initial direction of mass 1 (the -axis), • Acceleration of a rocket is .
stated by
• A rocket’s acceleration depends on three main
and along the direction perpendicular to the initial
factors. They are
direction (the -axis) stated by
1. The greater the exhaust velocity of the gases,
.
the greater the acceleration.
• The internal kinetic before and after the collision 2. The faster the rocket burns its fuel, the greater
of two objects that have equal masses is its acceleration.
3. The smaller the rocket's mass, the greater the
acceleration.
• Point masses are structureless particles that
Conceptual Questions
8.1Linear Momentum and Force 8.3Conservation of Momentum
1. An object that has a small mass and an object that 8. Professional Application
has a large mass have the same momentum. Which If you dive into water, you reach greater depths
object has the largest kinetic energy? than if you do a belly flop. Explain this difference in
2. An object that has a small mass and an object that depth using the concept of conservation of energy.
has a large mass have the same kinetic energy. Explain this difference in depth using what you have
Which mass has the largest momentum? learned in this chapter.
3. Professional Application 9. Under what circumstances is momentum
Football coaches advise players to block, hit, and conserved?
tackle with their feet on the ground rather than by 10. Can momentum be conserved for a system if there
leaping through the air. Using the concepts of are external forces acting on the system? If so,
momentum, work, and energy, explain how a under what conditions? If not, why not?
football player can be more effective with his feet 11. Momentum for a system can be conserved in one
on the ground. direction while not being conserved in another.
4. How can a small force impart the same momentum What is the angle between the directions? Give an
to an object as a large force? example.
12. Professional Application
8.2Impulse Explain in terms of momentum and Newton’s laws
how a car’s air resistance is due in part to the fact
5. Professional Application
that it pushes air in its direction of motion.
Explain in terms of impulse how padding reduces
13. Can objects in a system have momentum while
forces in a collision. State this in terms of a real
the momentum of the system is zero? Explain your
example, such as the advantages of a carpeted vs.
answer.
tile floor for a day care center.
14. Must the total energy of a system be conserved
6. While jumping on a trampoline, sometimes you land
whenever its momentum is conserved? Explain
on your back and other times on your feet. In which
why or why not.
case can you reach a greater height and why?
7. Professional Application
8.4Elastic Collisions in One Dimension
Tennis racquets have “sweet spots.” If the ball hits
a sweet spot then the player's arm is not jarred as 15. What is an elastic collision?
much as it would be otherwise. Explain why this is
the case. 8.5Inelastic Collisions in One Dimension
16. What is an inelastic collision? What is a perfectly
inelastic collision?
PAGE: 368
350 8 • Problems & Exercises
17. Mixed-pair ice skaters performing in a show are 8.7Introduction to Rocket Propulsion
standing motionless at arms length just before
20. Professional Application
starting a routine. They reach out, clasp hands,
Suppose a fireworks shell explodes, breaking into
and pull themselves together by only using their
three large pieces for which air resistance is
arms. Assuming there is no friction between the
negligible. How is the motion of the center of mass
blades of their skates and the ice, what is their
affected by the explosion? How would it be
velocity after their bodies meet?
affected if the pieces experienced significantly
18. A small pickup truck that has a camper shell
more air resistance than the intact shell?
slowly coasts toward a red light with negligible
21. Professional Application
friction. Two dogs in the back of the truck are
During a visit to the International Space Station,
moving and making various inelastic collisions
an astronaut was positioned motionless in the
with each other and the walls. What is the effect of
center of the station, out of reach of any solid
the dogs on the motion of the center of mass of
object on which he could exert a force. Suggest a
the system (truck plus entire load)? What is their
method by which he could move himself away
effect on the motion of the truck?
from this position, and explain the physics
involved.
8.6Collisions of Point Masses in Two
22. Professional Application
Dimensions
It is possible for the velocity of a rocket to be
19. Figure 8.14shows a cube at rest and a small object greater than the exhaust velocity of the gases it
heading toward it. (a) Describe the directions (angle ejects. When that is the case, the gas velocity and
) at which the small object can emerge after colliding gas momentum are in the same direction as that
elastically with the cube. How does depend on , of the rocket. How is the rocket still able to obtain
the so-called impact parameter? Ignore any effects thrust by ejecting the gases?
that might be due to rotation after the collision, and
assume that the cube is much more massive than the
small object. (b) Answer the same questions if the
small object instead collides with a massive sphere.
FIGURE8.14A small object approaches a collision with a much
more massive cube, after which its velocity has the direction .
The angles at which the small object can be scattered are
determined by the shape of the object it strikes and the impact
parameter .
Problems & Exercises
8.1Linear Momentum and Force 2. (a) What is the mass of a large ship that has a
momentum of , when the ship
1. (a) Calculate the momentum of a 2000-kg elephant
is moving at a speed of (b) Compare the
charging a hunter at a speed of . (b)
ship’s momentum to the momentum of a 1100-kg
Compare the elephant’s momentum with the
artillery shell fired at a speed of .
momentum of a 0.0400-kg tranquilizer dart fired at
a speed of . (c) What is the momentum of
the 90.0-kg hunter running at after
missing the elephant?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 369
8 • Problems & Exercises 351
3. (a) At what speed would a airplane 10. Professional Application
have to fly to have a momentum of A professional boxer hits his opponent with a
(the same as the ship’s 1000-N horizontal blow that lasts for 0.150 s. (a)
momentum in the problem above)? (b) What is the Calculate the impulse imparted by this blow. (b)
plane’s momentum when it is taking off at a speed What is the opponent’s final velocity, if his mass is
of ? (c) If the ship is an aircraft carrier that 105 kg and he is motionless in midair when struck
launches these airplanes with a catapult, discuss near his center of mass? (c) Calculate the recoil
the implications of your answer to (b) as it relates to velocity of the opponent’s 10.0-kg head if hit in
recoil effects of the catapult on the ship. this manner, assuming the head does not initially
4. (a) What is the momentum of a garbage truck that is transfer significant momentum to the boxer’s
and is moving at ? (b) At body. (d) Discuss the implications of your answers
what speed would an 8.00-kg trash can have the for parts (b) and (c).
same momentum as the truck? 11. Professional Application
5. A runaway train car that has a mass of 15,000 kg Suppose a child drives a bumper car head on into
travels at a speed of down a track. the side rail, which exerts a force of 4000 N on the
Compute the time required for a force of 1500 N to car for 0.200 s. (a) What impulse is imparted by
bring the car to rest. this force? (b) Find the final velocity of the bumper
6. The mass of Earth is and its orbital car if its initial velocity was 2.80 m/s and the car
radius is an average of . Calculate plus driver have a mass of 200 kg. You may
its linear momentum. neglect friction between the car and floor.
12. Professional Application
8.2Impulse One hazard of space travel is debris left by
previous missions. There are several thousand
7. A bullet is accelerated down the barrel of a gun by objects orbiting Earth that are large enough to be
hot gases produced in the combustion of gun detected by radar, but there are far greater
powder. What is the average force exerted on a numbers of very small objects, such as flakes of
0.0300-kg bullet to accelerate it to a speed of paint. Calculate the force exerted by a 0.100-mg
600.0 m/s in a time of 2.00 ms (milliseconds)? chip of paint that strikes a spacecraft window at a
8. Professional Application
relative speed of , given the
A car moving at 10.0 m/s crashes into a tree and
collision lasts .
stops in 0.26 s. Calculate the force the seat belt
13. Professional Application
exerts on a passenger in the car to bring him to a
A 75.0-kg person is riding in a car moving at 20.0
halt. The mass of the passenger is 70.0 kg.
m/s when the car runs into a bridge abutment. (a)
9. A person slaps her leg with her hand, bringing her
Calculate the average force on the person if he is
hand to rest in 2.50 milliseconds from an initial
stopped by a padded dashboard that compresses
speed of 4.00 m/s. (a) What is the average force
an average of 1.00 cm. (b) Calculate the average
exerted on the leg, taking the effective mass of the
force on the person if he is stopped by an air bag
hand and forearm to be 1.50 kg? (b) Would the
that compresses an average of 15.0 cm.
force be any different if the woman clapped her
14. Professional Application
hands together at the same speed and brought
Military rifles have a mechanism for reducing the
them to rest in the same time? Explain why or why
recoil forces of the gun on the person firing it. An
not.
internal part recoils over a relatively large distance
and is stopped by damping mechanisms in the
gun. The larger distance reduces the average force
needed to stop the internal part. (a) Calculate the
recoil velocity of a 1.00-kg plunger that directly
interacts with a 0.0200-kg bullet fired at 600 m/s
from the gun. (b) If this part is stopped over a
distance of 20.0 cm, what average force is exerted
upon it by the gun? (c) Compare this to the force
exerted on the gun if the bullet is accelerated to
its velocity in 10.0 ms (milliseconds).
PAGE: 370
352 8 • Problems & Exercises
15. A cruise ship with a mass of strikes 8.3Conservation of Momentum
a pier at a speed of 0.750 m/s. It comes to rest
23. Professional Application
6.00 m later, damaging the ship, the pier, and the
Train cars are coupled together by being bumped
tugboat captain’s finances. Calculate the average
into one another. Suppose two loaded train cars
force exerted on the pier using the concept of
are moving toward one another, the first having a
impulse. (Hint: First calculate the time it took to
mass of 150,000 kg and a velocity of 0.300 m/s,
bring the ship to rest.)
and the second having a mass of 110,000 kg and a
16. Calculate the final speed of a 110-kg rugby player
velocity of . (The minus indicates
who is initially running at 8.00 m/s but collides
direction of motion.) What is their final velocity?
head-on with a padded goalpost and experiences
24. Suppose a clay model of a koala bear has a mass
a backward force of for
of 0.200 kg and slides on ice at a speed of 0.750
.
m/s. It runs into another clay model, which is
17. Water from a fire hose is directed horizontally
initially motionless and has a mass of 0.350 kg.
against a wall at a rate of 50.0 kg/s and a speed of
Both being soft clay, they naturally stick together.
42.0 m/s. Calculate the magnitude of the force
What is their final velocity?
exerted on the wall, assuming the water’s
25. Professional Application
horizontal momentum is reduced to zero.
Consider the following question:A car moving at
18. A 0.450-kg hammer is moving horizontally at 7.00
10 m/s crashes into a tree and stops in 0.26 s.
m/s when it strikes a nail and comes to rest after
Calculate the force the seatbelt exerts on a
driving the nail 1.00 cm into a board. (a) Calculate
passenger in the car to bring him to a halt. The
the duration of the impact. (b) What was the
mass of the passenger is 70 kg.Would the answer
average force exerted on the nail?
to this question be different if the car with the
19. Starting with the definitions of momentum and
70-kg passenger had collided with a car that has a
kinetic energy, derive an equation for the kinetic
mass equal to and is traveling in the opposite
energy of a particle expressed as a function of its
direction and at the same speed? Explain your
momentum.
answer.
20. A ball with an initial velocity of 10 m/s moves at an
26. What is the velocity of a 900-kg car initially
angle above the -direction. The ball hits a
moving at 30.0 m/s, just after it hits a 150-kg deer
vertical wall and bounces off so that it is moving
initially running at 12.0 m/s in the same direction?
above the -direction with the same speed.
Assume the deer remains on the car.
In terms of m, the mass of the ball, what is the
27. A 1.80-kg falcon catches a 0.650-kg dove from
impulse delivered by the wall?
behind in midair. What is their velocity after
21. When serving a tennis ball, a player hits the ball
impact if the falcon’s velocity is initially 28.0 m/s
when its velocity is zero (at the highest point of a
and the dove’s velocity is 7.00 m/s in the same
vertical toss). The racquet exerts a force of 540 N
direction?
on the ball for 5.00 ms, giving it a final velocity of
45.0 m/s. Using these data, find the mass of the
8.4Elastic Collisions in One Dimension
ball.
22. A punter drops a ball from rest vertically 1 meter 28. Two identical objects (such as billiard balls) have a
down onto his foot. The ball leaves the foot with a one-dimensional collision in which one is initially
speed of 18 m/s at an angle above the motionless. After the collision, the moving object
horizontal. In terms of m, the mass of the ball, is stationary and the other moves with the same
what is the impulse delivered by the foot speed as the other originally had. Show that both
(magnitude and direction)? momentum and kinetic energy are conserved.
29. Professional Application
Two piloted satellites approach one another at a
relative speed of 0.250 m/s, intending to dock.
The first has a mass of , and the
second a mass of . If the two
satellites collide elastically rather than dock, what
is their final relative velocity?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 371
8 • Problems & Exercises 353
30. A 70.0-kg ice hockey goalie, originally at rest, 35. Professional Application
catches a 0.150-kg hockey puck slapped at him at Two piloted satellites approaching one another, at
a velocity of 35.0 m/s. Suppose the goalie and the a relative speed of 0.250 m/s, intending to dock.
ice puck have an elastic collision and the puck is The first has a mass of , and the
reflected back in the direction from which it came. second a mass of . (a) Calculate the
What would their final velocities be in this case? final velocity (after docking) by using the frame of
reference in which the first satellite was originally
8.5Inelastic Collisions in One Dimension at rest. (b) What is the loss of kinetic energy in this
inelastic collision? (c) Repeat both parts by using
31. A 0.240-kg billiard ball that is moving at 3.00 m/s
the frame of reference in which the second
strikes the bumper of a pool table and bounces
satellite was originally at rest. Explain why the
straight back at 2.40 m/s (80% of its original
change in velocity is different in the two frames,
speed). The collision lasts 0.0150 s. (a) Calculate
whereas the change in kinetic energy is the same
the average force exerted on the ball by the
in both.
bumper. (b) How much kinetic energy in joules is
36. Professional Application
lost during the collision? (c) What percent of the
A 30,000-kg freight car is coasting at 0.850 m/s
original energy is left?
with negligible friction under a hopper that dumps
32. During an ice show, a 60.0-kg skater leaps into the
110,000 kg of scrap metal into it. (a) What is the
air and is caught by an initially stationary 75.0-kg
final velocity of the loaded freight car? (b) How
skater. (a) What is their final velocity assuming
much kinetic energy is lost?
negligible friction and that the 60.0-kg skater’s
37. Professional Application
original horizontal velocity is 4.00 m/s? (b) How
Space probes may be separated from their
much kinetic energy is lost?
launchers by exploding bolts. (They bolt away
33. Professional Application
from one another.) Suppose a 4800-kg satellite
Using mass and speed data fromExample 8.1and
uses this method to separate from the 1500-kg
assuming that the football player catches the ball
remains of its launcher, and that 5000 J of kinetic
with his feet off the ground with both of them
energy is supplied to the two parts. What are their
moving horizontally, calculate: (a) the final velocity
subsequent velocities using the frame of reference
if the ball and player are going in the same
in which they were at rest before separation?
direction and (b) the loss of kinetic energy in this
38. A 0.0250-kg bullet is accelerated from rest to a
case. (c) Repeat parts (a) and (b) for the situation
speed of 550 m/s in a 3.00-kg rifle. The pain of the
in which the ball and the player are going in
rifle’s kick is much worse if you hold the gun
opposite directions. Might the loss of kinetic
loosely a few centimeters from your shoulder
energy be related to how much it hurts to catch
rather than holding it tightly against your shoulder.
the pass?
(a) Calculate the recoil velocity of the rifle if it is
34. A battleship that is and is originally
held loosely away from the shoulder. (b) How
at rest fires a 1100-kg artillery shell horizontally
much kinetic energy does the rifle gain? (c) What
with a velocity of 575 m/s. (a) If the shell is fired
is the recoil velocity if the rifle is held tightly
straight aft (toward the rear of the ship), there will
against the shoulder, making the effective mass
be negligible friction opposing the ship’s recoil.
28.0 kg? (d) How much kinetic energy is
Calculate its recoil velocity. (b) Calculate the
transferred to the rifle-shoulder combination? The
increase in internal kinetic energy (that is, for the
pain is related to the amount of kinetic energy,
ship and the shell). This energy is less than the
which is significantly less in this latter situation.
energy released by the gun powder—significant
(e) Calculate the momentum of a 110-kg football
heat transfer occurs.
player running at 8.00 m/s. Compare the player’s
momentum with the momentum of a hard-thrown
0.410-kg football that has a speed of 25.0 m/s.
Discuss its relationship to this problem.
PAGE: 372
354 8 • Problems & Exercises
39. Professional Application 43. During a circus act, an elderly performer thrills the
One of the waste products of a nuclear reactor is crowd by catching a cannon ball shot at him. The
plutonium-239 . This nucleus is cannon ball has a mass of 10.0 kg and the
radioactive and decays by splitting into a helium-4 horizontal component of its velocity is 8.00 m/s
nucleus and a uranium-235 nucleus when the 65.0-kg performer catches it. If the
, the latter of which is also performer is on nearly frictionless roller skates,
what is his recoil velocity?
radioactive and will itself decay some time later.
44. (a) During an ice skating performance, an initially
The energy emitted in the plutonium decay is
motionless 80.0-kg clown throws a fake barbell
and is entirely converted to kinetic
away. The clown’s ice skates allow her to recoil
energy of the helium and uranium nuclei. The
frictionlessly. If the clown recoils with a velocity of
mass of the helium nucleus is ,
0.500 m/s and the barbell is thrown with a
while that of the uranium is (note
velocity of 10.0 m/s, what is the mass of the
that the ratio of the masses is 4 to 235). (a)
barbell? (b) How much kinetic energy is gained by
Calculate the velocities of the two nuclei,
this maneuver? (c) Where does the kinetic energy
assuming the plutonium nucleus is originally at
come from?
rest. (b) How much kinetic energy does each
nucleus carry away? Note that the data given here
8.6Collisions of Point Masses in Two
are accurate to three digits only.
Dimensions
40. Professional Application
The Moon’s craters are remnants of meteorite 45. Two identical pucks collide on an air hockey table.
collisions. Suppose a fairly large asteroid that has One puck was originally at rest. (a) If the incoming
a mass of (about a kilometer puck has a speed of 6.00 m/s and scatters to an
across) strikes the Moon at a speed of 15.0 km/s. angle of ,what is the velocity (magnitude and
(a) At what speed does the Moon recoil after the direction) of the second puck? (You may use the
perfectly inelastic collision (the mass of the Moon result that for elastic collisions of
is ) ? (b) How much kinetic energy objects that have identical masses.) (b) Confirm
is lost in the collision? Such an event may have that the collision is elastic.
been observed by medieval English monks who 46. Confirm that the results of the exampleExample
reported observing a red glow and subsequent 8.7do conserve momentum in both the - and
haze about the Moon. (c) In October 2009, NASA -directions.
crashed a rocket into the Moon, and analyzed the 47. A 3000-kg cannon is mounted so that it can recoil
plume produced by the impact. (Significant only in the horizontal direction. (a) Calculate its
amounts of water were detected.) Answer part (a) recoil velocity when it fires a 15.0-kg shell at 480
and (b) for this real-life experiment. The mass of m/s at an angle of above the horizontal. (b)
the rocket was 2000 kg and its speed upon impact What is the kinetic energy of the cannon? This
was 9000 km/h. How does the plume produced energy is dissipated as heat transfer in shock
alter these results? absorbers that stop its recoil. (c) What happens to
41. Professional Application the vertical component of momentum that is
Two football players collide head-on in midair imparted to the cannon when it is fired?
while trying to catch a thrown football. The first 48. Professional Application
player is 95.0 kg and has an initial velocity of 6.00 A 5.50-kg bowling ball moving at 9.00 m/s collides
m/s, while the second player is 115 kg and has an with a 0.850-kg bowling pin, which is scattered at
initial velocity of –3.50 m/s. What is their velocity an angle of to the initial direction of the
just after impact if they cling together? bowling ball and with a speed of 15.0 m/s. (a)
42. What is the speed of a garbage truck that is Calculate the final velocity (magnitude and
and is initially moving at 25.0 m/s direction) of the bowling ball. (b) Is the collision
just after it hits and adheres to a trash can that is elastic? (c) Linear kinetic energy is greater after
80.0 kg and is initially at rest? the collision. Discuss how spin on the ball might
be converted to linear kinetic energy in the
collision.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 373
8 • Problems & Exercises 355
49. Professional Application 8.7Introduction to Rocket Propulsion
Ernest Rutherford (the first New Zealander to be
53. Professional Application
awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry)
Antiballistic missiles (ABMs) are designed to have
demonstrated that nuclei were very small and
very large accelerations so that they may intercept
dense by scattering helium-4 nuclei from
fast-moving incoming missiles in the short time
gold-197 nuclei . The energy of the
available. What is the takeoff acceleration of a
incoming helium nucleus was , and 10,000-kg ABM that expels 196 kg of gas per
the masses of the helium and gold nuclei were
second at an exhaust velocity of
and , 54. Professional Application
respectively (note that their mass ratio is 4 to What is the acceleration of a 5000-kg rocket
197). (a) If a helium nucleus scatters to an angle taking off from the Moon, where the acceleration
of during an elastic collision with a gold due to gravity is only , if the rocket expels
nucleus, calculate the helium nucleus’s final 8.00 kg of gas per second at an exhaust velocity of
speed and the final velocity (magnitude and
direction) of the gold nucleus. (b) What is the final
55. Professional Application
kinetic energy of the helium nucleus?
Calculate the increase in velocity of a 4000-kg
50. Professional Application
space probe that expels 3500 kg of its mass at an
Two cars collide at an icy intersection and stick
exhaust velocity of . You may
together afterward. The first car has a mass of
assume the gravitational force is negligible at the
1200 kg and is approaching at due
probe’s location.
south. The second car has a mass of 850 kg and is
56. Professional Application
approaching at due west. (a) Calculate
Ion-propulsion rockets have been proposed for
the final velocity (magnitude and direction) of the
use in space. They employ atomic ionization
cars. (b) How much kinetic energy is lost in the
techniques and nuclear energy sources to produce
collision? (This energy goes into deformation of
extremely high exhaust velocities, perhaps as
the cars.) Note that because both cars have an
great as . These techniques allow a
initial velocity, you cannot use the equations for
much more favorable payload-to-fuel ratio. To
conservation of momentum along the -axis and
illustrate this fact: (a) Calculate the increase in
-axis; instead, you must look for other simplifying
velocity of a 20,000-kg space probe that expels
aspects.
only 40.0-kg of its mass at the given exhaust
51. Starting with equations
velocity. (b) These engines are usually designed to
and
produce a very small thrust for a very long
for conservation time—the type of engine that might be useful on a
of momentum in the - and -directions and trip to the outer planets, for example. Calculate
assuming that one object is originally stationary, the acceleration of such an engine if it expels
prove that for an elastic collision of two objects of at the given velocity, assuming
equal masses, the acceleration due to gravity is negligible.
57. Derive the equation for the vertical acceleration of
a rocket.
58. Professional Application
(a) Calculate the maximum rate at which a rocket
as discussed in the text.
can expel gases if its acceleration cannot exceed
52. Integrated Concepts
seven times that of gravity. The mass of the rocket
A 90.0-kg ice hockey player hits a 0.150-kg puck,
just as it runs out of fuel is 75,000-kg, and its
giving the puck a velocity of 45.0 m/s. If both are
exhaust velocity is . Assume that
initially at rest and if the ice is frictionless, how far
the acceleration of gravity is the same as on
does the player recoil in the time it takes the puck
Earth’s surface . (b) Why might it be
to reach the goal 15.0 m away?
necessary to limit the acceleration of a rocket?
PAGE: 374
356 8 • Problems & Exercises
59. Given the following data for a fire extinguisher-toy 63. Construct Your Own Problem
wagon rocket experiment, calculate the average Consider an astronaut in deep space cut free from
exhaust velocity of the gases expelled from the her space ship and needing to get back to it. The
extinguisher. Starting from rest, the final velocity is astronaut has a few packages that she can throw
10.0 m/s. The total mass is initially 75.0 kg and is away to move herself toward the ship. Construct a
70.0 kg after the extinguisher is fired. problem in which you calculate the time it takes
60. How much of a single-stage rocket that is 100,000 her to get back by throwing all the packages at
kg can be anything but fuel if the rocket is to have one time compared to throwing them one at a
a final speed of , given that it expels time. Among the things to be considered are the
gases at an exhaust velocity of masses involved, the force she can exert on the
61. Professional Application packages through some distance, and the distance
(a) A 5.00-kg squid initially at rest ejects 0.250-kg to the ship.
of fluid with a velocity of 10.0 m/s. What is the 64. Construct Your Own Problem
recoil velocity of the squid if the ejection is done in Consider an artillery projectile striking armor
0.100 s and there is a 5.00-N frictional force plating. Construct a problem in which you find the
opposing the squid’s movement. (b) How much force exerted by the projectile on the plate.
energy is lost to work done against friction? Among the things to be considered are the mass
62. Unreasonable Results and speed of the projectile and the distance over
Squids have been reported to jump from the which its speed is reduced. Your instructor may
ocean and travel (measured horizontally) also wish for you to consider the relative merits of
before re-entering the water. (a) Calculate the depleted uranium versus lead projectiles based on
initial speed of the squid if it leaves the water at the greater density of uranium.
an angle of , assuming negligible lift from the
air and negligible air resistance. (b) The squid
propels itself by squirting water. What fraction of
its mass would it have to eject in order to achieve
the speed found in the previous part? The water is
ejected at ; gravitational force and friction
are neglected. (c) What is unreasonable about the
results? (d) Which premise is unreasonable, or
which premises are inconsistent?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 375
CHAPTER 9
Statics and Torque
FIGURE9.1On a short time scale, rocks like these in Australia’s Kalbarri National Park are static, or motionless relative to the Earth. (credit:
Richard Liblanc/Flickr)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
9.1The First Condition for Equilibrium
9.2The Second Condition for Equilibrium
9.3Stability
9.4Applications of Statics, Including Problem-Solving Strategies
9.5Simple Machines
9.6Forces and Torques in Muscles and Joints
INTRODUCTION TO STATICS AND TORQUE What might desks, bridges, buildings, trees, and mountains have in
common—at least in the eyes of a physicist? The answer is that they are ordinarily motionless relative to the Earth.
Furthermore, their acceleration is zero because they remain motionless. That means they also have something in
common with a car moving at a constant velocity, because anything with a constant velocity also has an acceleration
of zero. Now, the important part—Newton’s second law states that net , and so the net external force is zero
for all stationary objects and for all objects moving at constant velocity. There are forces acting, but they are
balanced. That is, they are inequilibrium.
Statics
Statics is the study of forces in equilibrium, a large group of situations that makes up a special case of Newton’s
second law. We have already considered a few such situations; in this chapter, we cover the topic more
thoroughly, including consideration of such possible effects as the rotation and deformation of an object by the
PAGE: 376
358 9 • Statics and Torque
forces acting on it.
How can we guarantee that a body is in equilibrium and what can we learn from systems that are in equilibrium?
There are actually two conditions that must be satisfied to achieve equilibrium. These conditions are the topics of
the first two sections of this chapter.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/9-introduction-to-statics-and-torque)
9.1 The First Condition for Equilibrium
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• State the first condition of equilibrium.
• Explain static equilibrium.
• Explain dynamic equilibrium.
The first condition necessary to achieve equilibrium is the one already mentioned: the net external force on the
system must be zero. Expressed as an equation, this is simply
9.1
Note that if net is zero, then the net external force inanydirection is zero. For example, the net external forces
along the typicalx- andy-axes are zero. This is written as
9.2
Figure 9.2andFigure 9.3illustrate situations where for bothstatic equilibrium(motionless), and
dynamic equilibrium(constant velocity).
FIGURE9.2This motionless person is in static equilibrium. The forces acting on him add up to zero. Both forces are vertical in this case.
FIGURE9.3This car is in dynamic equilibrium because it is moving at constant velocity. There are horizontal and vertical forces, but the net
external force in any direction is zero. The applied force between the tires and the road is balanced by air friction, and the weight of
the car is supported by the normal forces, here shown to be equal for all four tires.
However, it is not sufficient for the net external force of a system to be zero for a system to be in equilibrium.
Consider the two situations illustrated inFigure 9.4andFigure 9.5where forces are applied to an ice hockey stick
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 377
9.2 • The Second Condition for Equilibrium 359
lying flat on ice. The net external force is zero in both situations shown in the figure; but in one case, equilibrium is
achieved, whereas in the other, it is not. InFigure 9.4, the ice hockey stick remains motionless. But inFigure 9.5,
with the same forces applied in different places, the stick experiences accelerated rotation. Therefore, we know that
the point at which a force is applied is another factor in determining whether or not equilibrium is achieved. This will
be explored further in the next section.
FIGURE9.4An ice hockey stick lying flat on ice with two equal and opposite horizontal forces applied to it. Friction is negligible, and the
gravitational force is balanced by the support of the ice (a normal force). Thus, . Equilibrium is achieved, which is static
equilibrium in this case.
FIGURE9.5The same forces are applied at other points and the stick rotates—in fact, it experiences an accelerated rotation. Here
but the system isnotat equilibrium. Hence, the is a necessary—but not sufficient—condition for achieving equilibrium.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Torque
Investigate how torque causes an object to rotate. Discover the relationships between angular acceleration,
moment of inertia, angular momentum and torque.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/l/21angmomintsim).
9.2 The Second Condition for Equilibrium
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• State the second condition that is necessary to achieve equilibrium.
• Explain torque and the factors on which it depends.
• Describe the role of torque in rotational mechanics.
Torque
The second condition necessary to achieve equilibrium involves avoiding accelerated rotation (maintaining a
PAGE: 378
360 9 • Statics and Torque
constant angular velocity). A rotating body or system can be in equilibrium if its rate of rotation is constant and
remains unchanged by the forces acting on it. To understand what factors affect rotation, let us think about what
happens when you open an ordinary door by rotating it on its hinges.
Several familiar factors determine how effective you are in opening the door. SeeFigure 9.6. First of all, the larger
the force, the more effective it is in opening the door—obviously, the harder you push, the more rapidly the door
opens. Also, the point at which you push is crucial. If you apply your force too close to the hinges, the door will open
slowly, if at all. Most people have been embarrassed by making this mistake and bumping up against a door when it
did not open as quickly as expected. Finally, the direction in which you push is also important. The most effective
direction is perpendicular to the door—we push in this direction almost instinctively.
FIGURE9.6Torque is the turning or twisting effectiveness of a force, illustrated here for door rotation on its hinges (as viewed from
overhead). Torque has both magnitude and direction. (a) Counterclockwise torque is produced by this force, which means that the door will
rotate in a counterclockwise due to . Note that is the perpendicular distance of the pivot from the line of action of the force. (b) A
smaller counterclockwise torque is produced by a smaller force acting at the same distance from the hinges (the pivot point). (c) The
same force as in (a) produces a smaller counterclockwise torque when applied at a smaller distance from the hinges. (d) The same force as
in (a), but acting in the opposite direction, produces a clockwise torque. (e) A smaller counterclockwise torque is produced by the same
magnitude force acting at the same point but in a different direction. Here, is less than . (f) Torque is zero here since the force just pulls
on the hinges, producing no rotation. In this case, .
The magnitude, direction, and point of application of the force are incorporated into the definition of the physical
quantity called torque.Torqueis the rotational equivalent of a force. It is a measure of the effectiveness of a force in
changing or accelerating a rotation (changing the angular velocity over a period of time). In equation form, the
magnitude of torque is defined to be
9.3
where (the Greek letter tau) is the symbol for torque, is the distance from the pivot point to the point where the
force is applied, is the magnitude of the force, and is the angle between the force and the vector directed from
the point of application to the pivot point, as seen inFigure 9.6andFigure 9.7. An alternative expression for torque
is given in terms of theperpendicular lever arm as shown inFigure 9.6andFigure 9.7, which is defined as
9.4
so that
9.5
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 379
9.2 • The Second Condition for Equilibrium 361
FIGURE9.7A force applied to an object can produce a torque, which depends on the location of the pivot point. (a) The three factors , ,
and for pivot point A on a body are shown here— is the distance from the chosen pivot point to the point where the force is applied,
and is the angle between and the vector directed from the point of application to the pivot point. If the object can rotate around point A,
it will rotate counterclockwise. This means that torque is counterclockwise relative to pivot A. (b) In this case, point B is the pivot point. The
torque from the applied force will cause a clockwise rotation around point B, and so it is a clockwise torque relative to B.
The perpendicular lever arm is the shortest distance from the pivot point to the line along which acts; it is
shown as a dashed line inFigure 9.6andFigure 9.7. Note that the line segment that defines the distance is
perpendicular to , as its name implies. It is sometimes easier to find or visualize than to find both and . In
such cases, it may be more convenient to use rather than for torque, but both are equally
valid.
TheSI unit of torqueis newtons times meters, usually written as . For example, if you push perpendicular to
the door with a force of 40 N at a distance of 0.800 m from the hinges, you exert a torque of 32 N·m(0.800 m × 40 N
× sin 90º) relative to the hinges. If you reduce the force to 20 N, the torque is reduced to , and so on.
The torque is always calculated with reference to some chosen pivot point. For the same applied force, a different
choice for the location of the pivot will give you a different value for the torque, since both and depend on the
location of the pivot. Any point in any object can be chosen to calculate the torque about that point. The object may
not actually pivot about the chosen “pivot point.”
Note that for rotation in a plane, torque has two possible directions. Torque is either clockwise or counterclockwise
relative to the chosen pivot point, as illustrated for points B and A, respectively, inFigure 9.7. If the object can rotate
about point A, it will rotate counterclockwise, which means that the torque for the force is shown as
counterclockwise relative to A. But if the object can rotate about point B, it will rotate clockwise, which means the
torque for the force shown is clockwise relative to B. Also, the magnitude of the torque is greater when the lever arm
is longer.
Now,the second condition necessary to achieve equilibriumis thatthe net external torque on a system must be
zero. An external torque is one that is created by an external force. You can choose the point around which the
torque is calculated. The point can be the physical pivot point of a system or any other point in space—but it must be
the same point for all torques. If the second condition (net external torque on a system is zero) is satisfied for one
choice of pivot point, it will also hold true for any other choice of pivot point in or out of the system of interest. (This
is true only in an inertial frame of reference.) The second condition necessary to achieve equilibrium is stated in
equation form as
9.6
where net means total. Torques, which are in opposite directions are assigned opposite signs. A common
convention is to call counterclockwise (ccw) torques positive and clockwise (cw) torques negative.
When two children balance a seesaw as shown inFigure 9.8, they satisfy the two conditions for equilibrium. Most
people have perfect intuition about seesaws, knowing that the lighter child must sit farther from the pivot and that a
heavier child can keep a lighter one off the ground indefinitely.
PAGE: 380
362 9 • Statics and Torque
FIGURE9.8Two children balancing a seesaw satisfy both conditions for equilibrium. The lighter child sits farther from the pivot to create a
torque equal in magnitude to that of the heavier child.
EXAMPLE 9.1
She Saw Torques On A Seesaw
The two children shown inFigure 9.8are balanced on a seesaw of negligible mass. (This assumption is made to
keep the example simple—more involved examples will follow.) The first child has a mass of 26.0 kg and sits 1.60 m
from the pivot.(a) If the second child has a mass of 32.0 kg, how far is she from the pivot? (b) What is , the
supporting force exerted by the pivot?
Strategy
Both conditions for equilibrium must be satisfied. In part (a), we are asked for a distance; thus, the second condition
(regarding torques) must be used, since the first (regarding only forces) has no distances in it. To apply the second
condition for equilibrium, we first identify the system of interest to be the seesaw plus the two children. We take the
supporting pivot to be the point about which the torques are calculated. We then identify all external forces acting
on the system.
Solution (a)
The three external forces acting on the system are the weights of the two children and the supporting force of the
pivot. Let us examine the torque produced by each. Torque is defined to be
9.7
Here , so that for all three forces. That means for all three. The torques exerted by the
three forces are first,
9.8
second,
9.9
and third,
9.10
Note that a minus sign has been inserted into the second equation because this torque is clockwise and is therefore
negative by convention. Since acts directly on the pivot point, the distance is zero. A force acting on the pivot
cannot cause a rotation, just as pushing directly on the hinges of a door will not cause it to rotate. Now, the second
condition for equilibrium is that the sum of the torques on both children is zero. Therefore
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 381
9.2 • The Second Condition for Equilibrium 363
9.11
or
9.12
Weight is mass times the acceleration due to gravity. Entering for , we get
9.13
Solve this for the unknown :
9.14
The quantities on the right side of the equation are known; thus, is
9.15
As expected, the heavier child must sit closer to the pivot (1.30 m versus 1.60 m) to balance the seesaw.
Solution (b)
This part asks for a force . The easiest way to find it is to use the first condition for equilibrium, which is
9.16
The forces are all vertical, so that we are dealing with a one-dimensional problem along the vertical axis; hence, the
condition can be written as
9.17
where we again call the vertical axis they-axis. Choosing upward to be the positive direction, and using plus and
minus signs to indicate the directions of the forces, we see that
9.18
This equation yields what might have been guessed at the beginning:
9.19
So, the pivot supplies a supporting force equal to the total weight of the system:
9.20
Entering known values gives
9.21
Discussion
The two results make intuitive sense. The heavier child sits closer to the pivot. The pivot supports the weight of the
two children. Part (b) can also be solved using the second condition for equilibrium, since both distances are known,
but only if the pivot point is chosen to be somewhere other than the location of the seesaw’s actual pivot!
Several aspects of the preceding example have broad implications. First, the choice of the pivot as the point around
which torques are calculated simplified the problem. Since is exerted on the pivot point, its lever arm is zero.
Hence, the torque exerted by the supporting force is zero relative to that pivot point. The second condition for
equilibrium holds for any choice of pivot point, and so we choose the pivot point to simplify the solution of the
problem.
Second, the acceleration due to gravity canceled in this problem, and we were left with a ratio of masses.This will
not always be the case. Always enter the correct forces—do not jump ahead to enter some ratio of masses.
Third, the weight of each child is distributed over an area of the seesaw, yet we treated the weights as if each force
PAGE: 382
364 9 • Statics and Torque
were exerted at a single point. This is not an approximation—the distances and are the distances to points
directly below thecenter of gravityof each child. As we shall see in the next section, the mass and weight of a
system can act as if they are located at a single point.
Finally, note that the concept of torque has an importance beyond static equilibrium.Torque plays the same role in
rotational motion that force plays in linear motion.We will examine this in the next chapter.
Take-Home Experiment
Take a piece of modeling clay and put it on a table, then mash a cylinder down into it so that a ruler can balance
on the round side of the cylinder while everything remains still. Put a penny 8 cm away from the pivot. Where
would you need to put two pennies to balance? Three pennies?
9.3 Stability
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• State the types of equilibrium.
• Describe stable and unstable equilibriums.
• Describe neutral equilibrium.
It is one thing to have a system in equilibrium; it is quite another for it to be stable. The toy doll perched on the
man’s hand inFigure 9.9, for example, is not in stable equilibrium. There arethree types of equilibrium:stable,
unstable, andneutral. Figures throughout this module illustrate various examples.
Figure 9.9presentsa balanced system, such as the toy doll on the man’s hand, which has its center of gravity (cg)
directly over the pivot, so that the torque of the total weight is zero. This is equivalent to having the torques of the
individual parts balanced about the pivot point, in this case the hand. The cgs of the arms, legs, head, and torso are
labeled with smaller type.
FIGURE9.9A man balances a toy doll on one hand.
A system is said to be instable equilibriumif, when displaced from equilibrium, it experiences a net force or torque
in a direction opposite to the direction of the displacement. For example, a marble at the bottom of a bowl will
experience arestoringforce when displaced from its equilibrium position. This force moves it back toward the
equilibrium position. Most systems are in stable equilibrium, especially for small displacements. For another
example of stable equilibrium, see the pencil inFigure 9.10.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 383
9.3 • Stability 365
FIGURE9.10This pencil is in the condition of equilibrium. The net force on the pencil is zero and the total torque about any pivot is zero.
A system is inunstable equilibriumif, when displaced, it experiences a net force or torque in thesamedirection as
the displacement from equilibrium. A system in unstable equilibrium accelerates away from its equilibrium position
if displaced even slightly. An obvious example is a ball resting on top of a hill. Once displaced, it accelerates away
from the crest. See the next several figures for examples of unstable equilibrium.
FIGURE9.11If the pencil is displaced slightly to the side (counterclockwise), it is no longer in equilibrium. Its weight produces a clockwise
torque that returns the pencil to its equilibrium position.
FIGURE9.12If the pencil is displaced too far, the torque caused by its weight changes direction to counterclockwise and causes the
displacement to increase.
PAGE: 384
366 9 • Statics and Torque
FIGURE9.13This figure shows unstable equilibrium, although both conditions for equilibrium are satisfied.
FIGURE9.14If the pencil is displaced even slightly, a torque is created by its weight that is in the same direction as the displacement,
causing the displacement to increase.
A system is inneutral equilibriumif its equilibrium is independent of displacements from its original position. A
marble on a flat horizontal surface is an example. Combinations of these situations are possible. For example, a
marble on a saddle is stable for displacements toward the front or back of the saddle and unstable for
displacements to the side.Figure 9.15shows another example of neutral equilibrium.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 385
9.3 • Stability 367
FIGURE9.15(a) Here we see neutral equilibrium. The cg of a sphere on a flat surface lies directly above the point of support, independent
of the position on the surface. The sphere is therefore in equilibrium in any location, and if displaced, it will remain put. (b) Because it has a
circular cross section, the pencil is in neutral equilibrium for displacements perpendicular to its length.
When we consider how far a system in stable equilibrium can be displaced before it becomes unstable, we find that
some systems in stable equilibrium are more stable than others. The pencil inFigure 9.10and the person inFigure
9.16(a) are in stable equilibrium, but become unstable for relatively small displacements to the side. The critical
point is reached when the cg is no longerabovethe base of support. Additionally, since the cg of a person’s body is
above the pivots in the hips, displacements must be quickly controlled. This control is a central nervous system
function that is developed when we learn to hold our bodies erect as infants. For increased stability while standing,
the feet should be spread apart, giving a larger base of support. Stability is also increased by lowering one’s center
of gravity by bending the knees, as when a football player prepares to receive a ball or braces themselves for a
tackle. A cane, a crutch, or a walker increases the stability of the user, even more as the base of support widens.
Usually, the cg of a female is lower (closer to the ground) than a male. Young children have their center of gravity
between their shoulders, which increases the challenge of learning to walk.
FIGURE9.16(a) The center of gravity of an adult is above the hip joints (one of the main pivots in the body) and lies between two narrowly-
separated feet. Like a pencil standing on its eraser, this person is in stable equilibrium in relation to sideways displacements, but relatively
small displacements take his cg outside the base of support and make him unstable. Humans are less stable relative to forward and
PAGE: 386
368 9 • Statics and Torque
backward displacements because the feet are not very long. Muscles are used extensively to balance the body in the front-to-back
direction. (b) While bending in the manner shown, stability is increased by lowering the center of gravity. Stability is also increased if the
base is expanded by placing the feet farther apart.
Animals such as chickens have easier systems to control.Figure 9.17shows that the cg of a chicken lies below its
hip joints and between its widely separated and broad feet. Even relatively large displacements of the chicken’s cg
are stable and result in restoring forces and torques that return the cg to its equilibrium position with little effort on
the chicken’s part. Not all birds are like chickens, of course. Some birds, such as the flamingo, have balance systems
that are almost as sophisticated as that of humans.
Figure 9.17shows that the cg of a chicken is below the hip joints and lies above a broad base of support formed by
widely-separated and large feet. Hence, the chicken is in very stable equilibrium, since a relatively large
displacement is needed to render it unstable. The body of the chicken is supported from above by the hips and acts
as a pendulum between the hips. Therefore, the chicken is stable for front-to-back displacements as well as for
side-to-side displacements.
FIGURE9.17The center of gravity of a chicken is below the hip joints. The chicken is in stable equilibrium. The body of the chicken is
supported from above by the hips and acts as a pendulum between them.
Engineers and architects strive to achieve extremely stable equilibriums for buildings and other systems that must
withstand wind, earthquakes, and other forces that displace them from equilibrium. Although the examples in this
section emphasize gravitational forces, the basic conditions for equilibrium are the same for all types of forces. The
net external force must be zero, and the net torque must also be zero.
Take-Home Experiment
Stand straight with your heels, back, and head against a wall. Bend forward from your waist, keeping your heels
and bottom against the wall, to touch your toes. Can you do this without toppling over? Explain why and what
you need to do to be able to touch your toes without losing your balance. Is it easier for a woman to do this?
9.4 Applications of Statics, Including Problem-Solving Strategies
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Discuss the applications of Statics in real life.
• State and discuss various problem-solving strategies in Statics.
Statics can be applied to a variety of situations, ranging from raising a drawbridge to bad posture and back strain.
We begin with a discussion of problem-solving strategies specifically used for statics. Since statics is a special case
of Newton’s laws, both the general problem-solving strategies and the special strategies for Newton’s laws,
discussed inProblem-Solving Strategies, still apply.
Problem-Solving Strategy: Static Equilibrium Situations
1. The first step is to determine whether or not the system is instatic equilibrium. This condition is always the
case when theacceleration of the system is zero and accelerated rotation does not occur.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 387
9.4 • Applications of Statics, Including Problem-Solving Strategies 369
2. It is particularly important todraw a free body diagram for the system of interest. Carefully label all forces,
and note their relative magnitudes, directions, and points of application whenever these are known.
3. Solve the problem by applying either or both of the conditions for equilibrium (represented by the equations
and , depending on the list of known and unknown factors. If the second condition is
involved,choose the pivot point to simplify the solution. Any pivot point can be chosen, but the most useful
ones cause torques by unknown forces to be zero. (Torque is zero if the force is applied at the pivot (then
), or along a line through the pivot point (then )). Always choose a convenient coordinate system
for projecting forces.
4. Check the solution to see if it is reasonableby examining the magnitude, direction, and units of the answer.
The importance of this last step never diminishes, although in unfamiliar applications, it is usually more
difficult to judge reasonableness. These judgments become progressively easier with experience.
Now let us apply this problem-solving strategy for the pole vaulter shown in the three figures below. The pole is
uniform and has a mass of 5.00 kg. InFigure 9.18, the pole’s cg lies halfway between the vaulter’s hands. It seems
reasonable that the force exerted by each hand is equal to half the weight of the pole, or 24.5 N. This obviously
satisfies the first condition for equilibrium . The second condition is also satisfied, as we can
see by choosing the cg to be the pivot point. The weight exerts no torque about a pivot point located at the cg, since
it is applied at that point and its lever arm is zero. The equal forces exerted by the hands are equidistant from the
chosen pivot, and so they exert equal and opposite torques. Similar arguments hold for other systems where
supporting forces are exerted symmetrically about the cg. For example, the four legs of a uniform table each support
one-fourth of its weight.
InFigure 9.18, a pole vaulter holding a pole with its cg halfway between his hands is shown. Each hand exerts a
force equal to half the weight of the pole, . (b) The pole vaulter moves the pole to his left, and the
forces that the hands exert are no longer equal. SeeFigure 9.18. If the pole is held with its cg to the left of the
person, then he must push down with his right hand and up with his left. The forces he exerts are larger here
because they are in opposite directions and the cg is at a long distance from either hand.
Similar observations can be made using a meter stick held at different locations along its length.
FIGURE9.18A pole vaulter holds a pole horizontally with both hands.
PAGE: 388
370 9 • Statics and Torque
FIGURE9.19A pole vaulter is holding a pole horizontally with both hands. The center of gravity is near his right hand.
FIGURE9.20A pole vaulter is holding a pole horizontally with both hands. The center of gravity is to the left side of the vaulter.
If the pole vaulter holds the pole as shown inFigure 9.19, the situation is not as simple. The total force he exerts is
still equal to the weight of the pole, but it is not evenly divided between his hands. (If , then the torques
about the cg would not be equal since the lever arms are different.) Logically, the right hand should support more
weight, since it is closer to the cg. In fact, if the right hand is moved directly under the cg, it will support all the
weight. This situation is exactly analogous to two people carrying a load; the one closer to the cg carries more of its
weight. Finding the forces and is straightforward, as the next example shows.
If the pole vaulter holds the pole from near the end of the pole (Figure 9.20), the direction of the force applied by the
right hand of the vaulter reverses its direction.
EXAMPLE 9.2
What Force Is Needed to Support a Weight Held Near Its CG?
For the situation shown inFigure 9.19, calculate: (a) , the force exerted by the right hand, and (b) , the force
exerted by the left hand. The hands are 0.900 m apart, and the cg of the pole is 0.600 m from the left hand.
Strategy
Figure 9.19includes a free body diagram for the pole, the system of interest. There is not enough information to use
the first condition for equilibrium ), since two of the three forces are unknown and the hand forces cannot
be assumed to be equal in this case. There is enough information to use the second condition for equilibrium
if the pivot point is chosen to be at either hand, thereby making the torque from that hand zero. We
choose to locate the pivot at the left hand in this part of the problem, to eliminate the torque from the left hand.
Solution for (a)
There are now only two nonzero torques, those from the gravitational force ( ) and from the push or pull of the
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 389
9.4 • Applications of Statics, Including Problem-Solving Strategies 371
right hand ( ). Stating the second condition in terms of clockwise and counterclockwise torques,
9.22
or the algebraic sum of the torques is zero.
Here this is
9.23
since the weight of the pole creates a counterclockwise torque and the right hand counters with a clockwise torque.
Using the definition of torque, , noting that , and substituting known values, we obtain
9.24
Thus,
9.25
Solution for (b)
The first condition for equilibrium is based on the free body diagram in the figure. This implies that by Newton’s
second law:
9.26
From this we can conclude:
9.27
Solving for , we obtain
9.28
Discussion
is seen to be exactly half of , as we might have guessed, since is applied twice as far from the cg as .
If the pole vaulter holds the pole as he might at the start of a run, shown inFigure 9.20, the forces change again.
Both are considerably greater, and one force reverses direction.
Take-Home Experiment
This is an experiment to perform while standing in a bus or a train. Stand facing sideways. How do you move
your body to readjust the distribution of your mass as the bus accelerates and decelerates? Now stand facing
forward. How do you move your body to readjust the distribution of your mass as the bus accelerates and
decelerates? Why is it easier and safer to stand facing sideways rather than forward? Note: For your safety (and
those around you), make sure you are holding onto something while you carry out this activity!
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Balancing Act
Play with objects on a teeter totter to learn about balance. Test what you've learned by trying the Balance Challenge
game.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/9-4-applications-of-statics-including-
PAGE: 390
372 9 • Statics and Torque
problemsolving-strategies)
9.5 Simple Machines
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe different simple machines.
• Calculate the mechanical advantage.
Simple machines are devices that can be used to multiply or augment a force that we apply – often at the expense of
a distance through which we apply the force. The word for “machine” comes from the Greek word meaning “to help
make things easier.” Levers, gears, pulleys, wedges, and screws are some examples of machines. Energy is still
conserved for these devices because a machine cannot do more work than the energy put into it. However,
machines can reduce the input force that is needed to perform the job. The ratio of output to input force magnitudes
for any simple machine is called itsmechanical advantage(MA).
9.29
One of the simplest machines is the lever, which is a rigid bar pivoted at a fixed place called the fulcrum. Torques are
involved in levers, since there is rotation about a pivot point. Distances from the physical pivot of the lever are
crucial, and we can obtain a useful expression for the MA in terms of these distances.
FIGURE9.21A nail puller is a lever with a large mechanical advantage. The external forces on the nail puller are represented by solid
arrows. The force that the nail puller applies to the nail ( ) is not a force on the nail puller. The reaction force the nail exerts back on the
puller ( ) is an external force and is equal and opposite to . The perpendicular lever arms of the input and output forces are and .
Figure 9.21shows a lever type that is used as a nail puller. Crowbars, seesaws, and other such levers are all
analogous to this one. is the input force and is the output force. There are three vertical forces acting on the
nail puller (the system of interest) – these are and . is the reaction force back on the system, equal and
opposite to . (Note that is not a force on the system.) is the normal force upon the lever, and its torque is
zero since it is exerted at the pivot. The torques due to and must be equal to each other if the nail is not
moving, to satisfy the second condition for equilibrium . (In order for the nail to actually move, the torque
due to must be ever-so-slightly greater than torque due to .) Hence,
9.30
Notice that is the distance from the pivot point to the point where the input force is applied, and (not
labeled on the diagram) is the distance from the pivot point to the point where the output force is applied. The
distances and are the perpendicular components of the distances from where the input and output forces are
applied to the pivot, as shown in the figure. Rearranging the last equation gives
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 391
9.5 • Simple Machines 373
9.31
What interests us most here is that the magnitude of the force exerted by the nail puller, , is much greater than
the magnitude of the input force applied to the puller at the other end, . For the nail puller,
9.32
This equation is true for levers in general. For the nail puller, the MA is certainly greater than one. The longer the
handle on the nail puller, the greater the force you can exert with it.
Two other types of levers that differ slightly from the nail puller are a wheelbarrow and a shovel, shown inFigure
9.22. All these lever types are similar in that only three forces are involved – the input force, the output force, and
the force on the pivot – and thus their MAs are given by and , with distances being measured
relative to the physical pivot. The wheelbarrow and shovel differ from the nail puller because both the input and
output forces are on the same side of the pivot.
In the case of the wheelbarrow, the output force or load is between the pivot (the wheel’s axle) and the input or
applied force. In the case of the shovel, the input force is between the pivot (at the end of the handle) and the load,
but the input lever arm is shorter than the output lever arm. In this case, the MA is less than one.
FIGURE9.22(a) In the case of the wheelbarrow, the output force or load is between the pivot and the input force. The pivot is the wheel’s
axle. Here, the output force is greater than the input force. Thus, a wheelbarrow enables you to lift much heavier loads than you could with
your body alone. (b) In the case of the shovel, the input force is between the pivot and the load, but the input lever arm is shorter than the
output lever arm. The pivot is at the handle held by the right hand. Here, the output force (supporting the shovel’s load) is less than the
input force (from the hand nearest the load), because the input is exerted closer to the pivot than is the output.
EXAMPLE 9.3
What is the Advantage for the Wheelbarrow?
In the wheelbarrow ofFigure 9.22, the load has a perpendicular lever arm of 7.50 cm, while the hands have a
perpendicular lever arm of 1.02 m. (a) What upward force must you exert to support the wheelbarrow and its load if
their combined mass is 45.0 kg? (b) What force does the wheelbarrow exert on the ground?
PAGE: 392
374 9 • Statics and Torque
Strategy
Here, we use the concept of mechanical advantage.
Solution
(a) In this case, becomes
9.33
Adding values into this equation yields
9.34
The free-body diagram (seeFigure 9.22) gives the following normal force: . Therefore,
. is the normal force acting on the wheel; by Newton’s third law, the
force the wheel exerts on the ground is .
Discussion
An even longer handle would reduce the force needed to lift the load. The MA here is .
Another very simple machine is the inclined plane. Pushing a cart up a plane is easier than lifting the same cart
straight up to the top using a ladder, because the applied force is less. However, the work done in both cases
(assuming the work done by friction is negligible) is the same. Inclined lanes or ramps were probably used during
the construction of the Egyptian pyramids to move large blocks of stone to the top.
A crank is a lever that can be rotated about its pivot, as shown inFigure 9.23. Such a machine may not look like
a lever, but the physics of its actions remain the same. The MA for a crank is simply the ratio of the radii .
Wheels and gears have this simple expression for their MAs too. The MA can be greater than 1, as it is for the crank,
or less than 1, as it is for the simplified car axle driving the wheels, as shown. If the axle’s radius is and the
wheel’s radius is , then and the axle would have to exert a force of on
the wheel to enable it to exert a force of on the ground.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 393
9.5 • Simple Machines 375
FIGURE9.23(a) A crank is a type of lever that can be rotated about its pivot. Cranks are usually designed to have a large MA. (b) A
simplified automobile axle drives a wheel, which has a much larger diameter than the axle. The MA is less than 1. (c) An ordinary pulley is
used to lift a heavy load. The pulley changes the direction of the force exerted by the cord without changing its magnitude. Hence, this
machine has an MA of 1.
An ordinary pulley has an MA of 1; it only changes the direction of the force and not its magnitude. Combinations of
pulleys, such as those illustrated inFigure 9.24, are used to multiply force. If the pulleys are friction-free, then the
force output is approximately an integral multiple of the tension in the cable. The number of cables pulling directly
upward on the system of interest, as illustrated in the figures given below, is approximately the MA of the pulley
system. Since each attachment applies an external force in approximately the same direction as the others, they
add, producing a total force that is nearly an integral multiple of the input force .
FIGURE9.24(a) The combination of pulleys is used to multiply force. The force is an integral multiple of tension if the pulleys are
PAGE: 394
376 9 • Statics and Torque
frictionless. This pulley system has two cables attached to its load, thus applying a force of approximately . This machine has .
(b) Three pulleys are used to lift a load in such a way that the mechanical advantage is about 3. Effectively, there are three cables attached
to the load. (c) This pulley system applies a force of , so that it has . Effectively, four cables are pulling on the system of interest.
9.6 Forces and Torques in Muscles and Joints
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the forces exerted by muscles.
• State how a bad posture causes back strain.
• Discuss the benefits of skeletal muscles attached close to joints.
• Discuss various complexities in the real system of muscles, bones, and joints.
Muscles, bones, and joints are some of the most interesting applications of statics. There are some surprises.
Muscles, for example, exert far greater forces than we might think.Figure 9.25shows a forearm holding a book and
a schematic diagram of an analogous lever system. The schematic is a good approximation for the forearm, which
looks more complicated than it is, and we can get some insight into the way typical muscle systems function by
analyzing it.
Muscles can only contract, so they occur in pairs. In the arm, the biceps muscle is a flexor—that is, it closes the limb.
The triceps muscle is an extensor that opens the limb. This configuration is typical of skeletal muscles, bones, and
joints in humans and other vertebrates. Most skeletal muscles exert much larger forces within the body than the
limbs apply to the outside world. The reason is clear once we realize that most muscles are attached to bones via
tendons close to joints, causing these systems to have mechanical advantages much less than one. Viewing them as
simple machines, the input force is much greater than the output force, as seen inFigure 9.25.
FIGURE9.25(a) The figure shows the forearm of a person holding a book. The biceps exert a force to support the weight of the forearm
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 395
9.6 • Forces and Torques in Muscles and Joints 377
and the book. The triceps are assumed to be relaxed. (b) Here, you can view an approximately equivalent mechanical system with the pivot
at the elbow joint as seen inExample 9.4.
EXAMPLE 9.4
Muscles Exert Bigger Forces Than You Might Think
Calculate the force the biceps muscle must exert to hold the forearm and its load as shown inFigure 9.25, and
compare this force with the weight of the forearm plus its load. You may take the data in the figure to be accurate to
three significant figures.
Strategy
There are four forces acting on the forearm and its load (the system of interest). The magnitude of the force of the
biceps is ; that of the elbow joint is ; that of the weights of the forearm is , and its load is . Two of these
are unknown ( and ), so that the first condition for equilibrium cannot by itself yield . But if we use the
second condition and choose the pivot to be at the elbow, then the torque due to is zero, and the only unknown
becomes .
Solution
The torques created by the weights are clockwise relative to the pivot, while the torque created by the biceps is
counterclockwise; thus, the second condition for equilibrium becomes
9.35
Note that for all forces, since for all forces. This equation can easily be solved for in terms of
known quantities, yielding
9.36
Entering the known values gives
9.37
which yields
9.38
Now, the combined weight of the arm and its load is , so that the ratio of the force
exerted by the biceps to the total weight is
9.39
Discussion
This means that the biceps muscle is exerting a force 7.38 times the weight supported.
In the above example of the biceps muscle, the angle between the forearm and upper arm is 90°. If this angle
changes, the force exerted by the biceps muscle also changes. In addition, the length of the biceps muscle changes.
The force the biceps muscle can exert depends upon its length; it is smaller when it is shorter than when it is
stretched.
Very large forces are also created in the joints. In the previous example, the downward force exerted by the
humerus at the elbow joint equals 407 N, or 6.38 times the total weight supported. (The calculation of is
straightforward and is left as an end-of-chapter problem.) Because muscles can contract, but not expand beyond
their resting length, joints and muscles often exert forces that act in opposite directions and thus subtract. (In the
above example, the upward force of the muscle minus the downward force of the joint equals the weight
supported—that is, , approximately equal to the weight supported.) Forces in muscles and
PAGE: 396
378 9 • Statics and Torque
joints are largest when their load is a long distance from the joint, as the book is in the previous example.
In racquet sports such as tennis the constant extension of the arm during game play creates large forces in this way.
The mass times the lever arm of a tennis racquet is an important factor, and many players use the heaviest racquet
they can handle. It is no wonder that joint deterioration and damage to the tendons in the elbow, such as “tennis
elbow,” can result from repetitive motion, undue torques, and possibly poor racquet selection in such sports.
Various tried techniques for holding and using a racquet or bat or stick not only increases sporting prowess but can
minimize fatigue and long-term damage to the body. For example, tennis balls correctly hit at the “sweet spot” on
the racquet will result in little vibration or impact force being felt in the racquet and the body—less torque as
explained inCollisions of Extended Bodies in Two Dimensions. Twisting the hand to provide top spin on the ball or
using an extended rigid elbow in a backhand stroke can also aggravate the tendons in the elbow.
Training coaches and physical therapists use the knowledge of relationships between forces and torques in the
treatment of muscles and joints. In physical therapy, an exercise routine can apply a particular force and torque
which can, over a period of time, revive muscles and joints. Some exercises are designed to be carried out under
water, because this requires greater forces to be exerted, further strengthening muscles. However, connecting
tissues in the limbs, such as tendons and cartilage as well as joints are sometimes damaged by the large forces they
carry. Often, this is due to accidents, but heavily muscled athletes, such as weightlifters, can tear muscles and
connecting tissue through effort alone.
The back is considerably more complicated than the arm or leg, with various muscles and joints between vertebrae,
all having mechanical advantages less than 1. Back muscles must, therefore, exert very large forces, which are
borne by the spinal column. Discs crushed by mere exertion are very common. The jaw is somewhat
exceptional—the masseter muscles that close the jaw have a mechanical advantage greater than 1 for the back
teeth, allowing us to exert very large forces with them. A cause of stress headaches is persistent clenching of teeth
where the sustained large force translates into fatigue in muscles around the skull.
Figure 9.26shows how bad posture causes back strain. In part (a), we see a person with good posture. Note that her
upper body’s cg is directly above the pivot point in the hips, which in turn is directly above the base of support at her
feet. Because of this, her upper body’s weight exerts no torque about the hips. The only force needed is a vertical
force at the hips equal to the weight supported. No muscle action is required, since the bones are rigid and transmit
this force from the floor. This is a position of unstable equilibrium, but only small forces are needed to bring the
upper body back to vertical if it is slightly displaced. Bad posture is shown in part (b); we see that the upper body’s
cg is in front of the pivot in the hips. This creates a clockwise torque around the hips that is counteracted by muscles
in the lower back. These muscles must exert large forces, since they have typically small mechanical advantages.
(In other words, the perpendicular lever arm for the muscles is much smaller than for the cg.) Poor posture can also
cause muscle strain for people sitting at their desks using computers. Special chairs are available that allow the
body’s CG to be more easily situated above the seat, to reduce back pain. Prolonged muscle action produces muscle
strain. Note that the cg of the entire body is still directly above the base of support in part (b) ofFigure 9.26. This is
compulsory; otherwise the person would not be in equilibrium. We lean forward for the same reason when carrying
a load on our backs, to the side when carrying a load in one arm, and backward when carrying a load in front of us,
as seen inFigure 9.27.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 397
9.6 • Forces and Torques in Muscles and Joints 379
FIGURE9.26(a) Good posture places the upper body’s cg over the pivots in the hips, eliminating the need for muscle action to balance the
body. (b) Poor posture requires exertion by the back muscles to counteract the clockwise torque produced around the pivot by the upper
body’s weight. The back muscles have a small effective perpendicular lever arm, , and must therefore exert a large force . Note that
the legs lean backward to keep the cg of the entire body above the base of support in the feet.
You have probably been warned against lifting objects with your back. This action, even more than bad posture, can
cause muscle strain and damage discs and vertebrae, since abnormally large forces are created in the back muscles
and spine.
FIGURE9.27People adjust their stance to maintain balance. (a) A father carrying his son piggyback leans forward to position their overall
cg above the base of support at his feet. (b) A student carrying a shoulder bag leans to the side to keep the overall cg over their feet. (c)
Another student carrying a load of books in her arms leans backward for the same reason.
EXAMPLE 9.5
Do Not Lift with Your Back
Consider the person lifting a heavy box with his back, shown inFigure 9.28. (a) Calculate the magnitude of the force
in the back muscles that is needed to support the upper body plus the box and compare this with his weight.
The mass of the upper body is 55.0 kg and the mass of the box is 30.0 kg. (b) Calculate the magnitude and direction
of the force exerted by the vertebrae on the spine at the indicated pivot point. Again, data in the figure may be
taken to be accurate to three significant figures.
Strategy
By now, we sense that the second condition for equilibrium is a good place to start, and inspection of the known
values confirms that it can be used to solve for if the pivot is chosen to be at the hips. The torques created by
and are clockwise, while that created by is counterclockwise.
PAGE: 398
380 9 • Statics and Torque
Solution for (a)
Using the perpendicular lever arms given in the figure, the second condition for equilibrium becomes
9.40
Solving for yields
9.41
The ratio of the force the back muscles exert to the weight of the upper body plus its load is
9.42
This force is considerably larger than it would be if the load were not present.
Solution for (b)
More important in terms of its damage potential is the force on the vertebrae . The first condition for equilibrium
( ) can be used to find its magnitude and direction. Using for vertical and for horizontal, the condition
for the net external forces along those axes to be zero
9.43
Starting with the vertical ( ) components, this yields
9.44
Thus,
9.45
yielding
9.46
Similarly, for the horizontal ( ) components,
9.47
yielding
9.48
The magnitude of is given by the Pythagorean theorem:
9.49
The direction of is
9.50
Note that the ratio of to the weight supported is
9.51
Discussion
This force is about 5.6 times greater than it would be if the person were standing erect. The trouble with the back is
not so much that the forces are large—because similar forces are created in our hips, knees, and ankles—but that
our spines are relatively weak. Proper lifting, performed with the back erect and using the legs to raise the body and
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 399
9.6 • Forces and Torques in Muscles and Joints 381
load, creates much smaller forces in the back—in this case, about 5.6 times smaller.
FIGURE9.28This figure shows that large forces are exerted by the back muscles and experienced in the vertebrae when a person lifts with
their back, since these muscles have small effective perpendicular lever arms. The data shown here are analyzed in the preceding example,
Example 9.5.
What are the benefits of having most skeletal muscles attached so close to joints? One advantage is speed because
small muscle contractions can produce large movements of limbs in a short period of time. Other advantages are
flexibility and agility, made possible by the large numbers of joints and the ranges over which they function. For
example, it is difficult to imagine a system with biceps muscles attached at the wrist that would be capable of the
broad range of movement we vertebrates possess.
There are some interesting complexities in real systems of muscles, bones, and joints. For instance, the pivot point
in many joints changes location as the joint is flexed, so that the perpendicular lever arms and the mechanical
advantage of the system change, too. Thus the force the biceps muscle must exert to hold up a book varies as the
forearm is flexed. Similar mechanisms operate in the legs, which explain, for example, why there is less leg strain
when a bicycle seat is set at the proper height. The methods employed in this section give a reasonable description
of real systems provided enough is known about the dimensions of the system. There are many other interesting
examples of force and torque in the body—a few of these are the subject of end-of-chapter problems.
PAGE: 400
382 9 • Glossary
Glossary
center of gravity the point where the total weight of stable equilibrium a system, when displaced,
the body is assumed to be concentrated experiences a net force or torque in a direction
dynamic equilibrium a state of equilibrium in which opposite to the direction of the displacement
the net external force and torque on a system static equilibrium a state of equilibrium in which the
moving with constant velocity are zero net external force and torque acting on a system is
mechanical advantage the ratio of output to input zero
forces for any simple machine static equilibrium equilibrium in which the
neutral equilibrium a state of equilibrium that is acceleration of the system is zero and accelerated
independent of a system’s displacements from its rotation does not occur
original position torque turning or twisting effectiveness of a force
perpendicular lever arm the shortest distance from unstable equilibrium a system, when displaced,
the pivot point to the line along which lies experiences a net force or torque in the same
SI units of torque newton times meters, usually direction as the displacement from equilibrium
written as N·m
Section Summary
9.1The First Condition for Equilibrium 9.3Stability
• Statics is the study of forces in equilibrium. • A system is said to be in stable equilibrium if, when
• Two conditions must be met to achieve displaced from equilibrium, it experiences a net
equilibrium, which is defined to be motion without force or torque in a direction opposite the direction
linear or rotational acceleration. of the displacement.
• The first condition necessary to achieve • A system is in unstable equilibrium if, when
equilibrium is that the net external force on the displaced from equilibrium, it experiences a net
system must be zero, so that . force or torque in the same direction as the
displacement from equilibrium.
9.2The Second Condition for Equilibrium
• A system is in neutral equilibrium if its equilibrium
• The second condition assures those torques are is independent of displacements from its original
also balanced. Torque is the rotational equivalent position.
of a force in producing a rotation and is defined to
9.4Applications of Statics, Including
be
Problem-Solving Strategies
where is torque, is the distance from the pivot • Statics can be applied to a variety of situations,
point to the point where the force is applied, is ranging from raising a drawbridge to bad posture
the magnitude of the force, and is the angle and back strain. We have discussed the problem-
between and the vector directed from the point solving strategies specifically useful for statics.
where the force acts to the pivot point. The Statics is a special case of Newton’s laws, both the
perpendicular lever arm is defined to be general problem-solving strategies and the special
strategies for Newton’s laws, discussed in
Problem-Solving Strategies, still apply.
so that
9.5Simple Machines
• The perpendicular lever arm is the shortest • Simple machines are devices that can be used to
distance from the pivot point to the line along multiply or augment a force that we apply – often
which acts. The SI unit for torque is newton- at the expense of a distance through which we
meter . The second condition necessary to have to apply the force.
achieve equilibrium is that the net external torque • The ratio of output to input forces for any simple
on a system must be zero: machine is called its mechanical advantage
• A few simple machines are the lever, nail puller,
By convention, counterclockwise torques are wheelbarrow, crank, etc.
positive, and clockwise torques are negative.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 401
9 • Conceptual Questions 383
9.6Forces and Torques in Muscles and of our muscles are attached close to joints.
Joints • Someone with good posture stands or sits in such
a way that the person's center of gravity lies
• Statics plays an important part in understanding
directly above the pivot point in the hips, thereby
everyday strains in our muscles and bones.
avoiding back strain and damage to disks.
• Many lever systems in the body have a mechanical
advantage of significantly less than one, as many
Conceptual Questions
9.1The First Condition for Equilibrium 9.5Simple Machines
1. What can you say about the velocity of a moving 9. Scissors are like a double-lever system. Which of
body that is in dynamic equilibrium? Draw a sketch the simple machines inFigure 9.21andFigure 9.22
of such a body using clearly labeled arrows to is most analogous to scissors?
represent all external forces on the body. 10. Suppose you pull a nail at a constant rate using a
2. Under what conditions can a rotating body be in nail puller as shown inFigure 9.21. Is the nail
equilibrium? Give an example. puller in equilibrium? What if you pull the nail with
some acceleration – is the nail puller in
9.2The Second Condition for Equilibrium equilibrium then? In which case is the force
applied to the nail puller larger and why?
3. What three factors affect the torque created by a
11. Explain the mechanical advantage of a
force relative to a specific pivot point?
wheelbarrow and how it explains why moving a
4. A wrecking ball is being used to knock down a
heavy load is easier with a wheelbarrow.
building. One tall unsupported concrete wall
12. How does a pulley enable a person to lift a load as
remains standing. If the wrecking ball hits the wall
heavy as a piano with little effort?
near the top, is the wall more likely to fall over by
rotating at its base or by falling straight down?
9.6Forces and Torques in Muscles and
Explain your answer. How is it most likely to fall if it
Joints
is struck with the same force at its base? Note that
this depends on how firmly the wall is attached at 13. Why are the forces exerted on the outside world
its base. by the limbs of our bodies usually much smaller
5. Mechanics sometimes put a length of pipe over the than the forces exerted by muscles inside the
handle of a wrench when trying to remove a very body?
tight bolt. How does this help? (It is also hazardous 14. Explain why the forces in our joints are several
since it can break the bolt.) times larger than the forces we exert on the
outside world with our limbs. Can these forces be
9.3Stability even greater than muscle forces?
15. Certain types of dinosaurs were bipedal (walked
6. A round pencil lying on its side as inFigure 9.12is
on two legs). What is a good reason that these
in neutral equilibrium relative to displacements
creatures invariably had long tails if they had long
perpendicular to its length. What is its stability
necks?
relative to displacements parallel to its length?
16. Swimmers and athletes during competition need
7. Explain the need for tall towers on a suspension
to go through certain postures at the beginning of
bridge to ensure stable equilibrium.
the race. Consider the balance of the person and
why start-offs are so important for races.
9.4Applications of Statics, Including
17. If the maximum force the biceps muscle can exert
Problem-Solving Strategies
is 1000 N, can we pick up an object that weighs
8. When visiting some countries, you may see a 1000 N? Explain your answer.
person balancing a load on the head. Explain why 18. Suppose the biceps muscle was attached through
the center of mass of the load needs to be directly tendons to the upper arm close to the elbow and
above the person’s neck vertebrae. the forearm near the wrist. What would be the
advantages and disadvantages of this type of
construction for the motion of the arm?
PAGE: 402
384 9 • Problems & Exercises
19. Explain one of the reasons why pregnant women
often suffer from back strain late in their
pregnancy.
Problems & Exercises
9.2The Second Condition for Equilibrium 9.3Stability
1. (a) When opening a door, you push on it 6. Suppose a horse leans against a wall as inFigure
perpendicularly with a force of 55.0 N at a distance 9.29, emulating a scene in the comedy movieCat
of 0.850m from the hinges. What torque are you Ballou. Calculate the force exerted on the wall
exerting relative to the hinges? (b) Does it matter if assuming that force is horizontal while using the
you push at the same height as the hinges? data in the schematic representation of the
2. When tightening a bolt, you push perpendicularly situation. Note that the force exerted on the wall is
on a wrench with a force of 165 N at a distance of equal in magnitude and opposite in direction to the
0.140 m from the center of the bolt. (a) How much force exerted on the horse, keeping it in
torque are you exerting in newton × meters (relative equilibrium. The total mass of the horse and rider is
to the center of the bolt)? (b) Convert this torque to 500 kg. Take the data to be accurate to three digits.
footpounds.
3. Two children push on opposite sides of a door
during play. Both push horizontally and
perpendicular to the door. One child pushes with a
force of 17.5 N at a distance of 0.600 m from the
hinges, and the second child pushes at a distance of
0.450 m. What force must the second child exert to
keep the door from moving? Assume friction is
negligible.
4. Use the second condition for equilibrium
to calculate inExample 9.1,
employing any data given or solved for in part (a) of
the example.
5. Repeat the seesaw problem inExample 9.1with FIGURE9.29
the center of mass of the seesaw 0.160 m to the
7. Two children of mass 20.0 kg and 30.0 kg sit
left of the pivot (on the side of the lighter child) and
balanced on a seesaw with the pivot point located
assuming a mass of 12.0 kg for the seesaw. The
at the center of the seesaw. If the children are
other data given in the example remain unchanged.
separated by a distance of 3.00 m, at what distance
Explicitly show how you follow the steps in the
from the pivot point is the small child sitting in
Problem-Solving Strategy for static equilibrium.
order to maintain the balance?
8. (a) Calculate the magnitude and direction of the
force on each foot of the horse inFigure 9.29(two
are on the ground), assuming the center of mass of
the horse is midway between the feet. The total
mass of the horse and rider is 500kg. (b) What is
the minimum coefficient of friction between the
hooves and ground? Note that the force exerted by
the wall is horizontal.
9. A person carries a plank of wood 2.00 m long with
one hand pushing down on it at one end with a
force and the other hand holding it up at .500 m
from the end of the plank with force . If the plank
has a mass of 20.0 kg and its center of gravity is at
the middle of the plank, what are the magnitudes of
the forces and ?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 403
9 • Problems & Exercises 385
10. A 17.0-m-high and 11.0-m-long wall under 12. Suppose the weight of the drawbridge inFigure
construction and its bracing are shown inFigure 9.32is supported entirely by its hinges and the
9.30. The wall is in stable equilibrium without the opposite shore, so that its cables are slack. The
bracing but can pivot at its base. Calculate the mass of the bridge is 2500 kg. (a) What fraction of
force exerted by each of the 10 braces if a strong the weight is supported by the opposite shore if
wind exerts a horizontal force of 650 N on each the point of support is directly beneath the cable
square meter of the wall. Assume that the net attachments? (b) What is the direction and
force from the wind acts at a height halfway up the magnitude of the force the hinges exert on the
wall and that all braces exert equal forces parallel bridge under these circumstances?
to their lengths. Neglect the thickness of the wall.
FIGURE9.30
11. (a) What force must be exerted by the wind to
support a 2.50-kg chicken in the position shown in
Figure 9.31? (b) What is the ratio of this force to FIGURE9.32A small drawbridge, showing the forces on the
hinges ( ), its weight ( ), and the tension in its wires ( ).
the chicken’s weight? (c) Does this support the
contention that the chicken has a relatively stable 13. Suppose a 900-kg car is on the bridge inFigure
construction? 9.32with its center of mass halfway between the
hinges and the cable attachments. (The bridge is
supported by the cables and hinges only.) (a) Find
the force in the cables. (b) Find the direction and
magnitude of the force exerted by the hinges on
the bridge.
FIGURE9.31
PAGE: 404
386 9 • Problems & Exercises
14. A sandwich board advertising sign is constructed 9.4Applications of Statics, Including
as shown inFigure 9.33. The sign’s mass is 8.00 Problem-Solving Strategies
kg. (a) Calculate the tension in the chain assuming
17. To get up on the roof, a person (mass 70.0 kg)
no friction between the legs and the sidewalk. (b)
places a 6.00-m aluminum ladder (mass 10.0 kg)
What force is exerted by each side on the hinge?
against the house on a concrete pad with the base
of the ladder 2.00 m from the house. The ladder
rests against a plastic rain gutter, which we can
assume to be frictionless. The center of mass of
the ladder is 2 m from the bottom. The person is
standing 3 m from the bottom. What are the
magnitudes of the forces on the ladder at the top
and bottom?
18. InFigure 9.20, the cg of the pole held by the pole
vaulter is 2.00 m from the left hand, and the hands
are 0.700 m apart. Calculate the force exerted by
(a) his right hand and (b) his left hand. (c) If each
hand supports half the weight of the pole inFigure
9.18, show that the second condition for
equilibrium is satisfied for a pivot
other than the one located at the center of gravity
of the pole. Explicitly show how you follow the
FIGURE9.33A sandwich board advertising sign steps in the Problem-Solving Strategy for static
demonstrates tension.
equilibrium described above.
15. (a) What minimum coefficient of friction is needed
between the legs and the ground to keep the sign 9.5Simple Machines
inFigure 9.33in the position shown if the chain
19. What is the mechanical advantage of a nail
breaks? (b) What force is exerted by each side on
puller—similar to the one shown inFigure 9.21
the hinge?
—where you exert a force from the pivot
16. An athlete is attempting to perform splits. From
and the nail is on the other side? What
the information given inFigure 9.34, calculate the
minimum force must you exert to apply a force of
magnitude and direction of the force exerted on
to the nail?
each foot by the floor.
20. Suppose you needed to raise a 250-kg mower a
distance of 6.0 cm above the ground to change a
tire. If you had a 2.0-m long lever, where would
you place the fulcrum if your force was limited to
300 N?
21. a) What is the mechanical advantage of a
wheelbarrow, such as the one inFigure 9.22, if the
center of gravity of the wheelbarrow and its load
has a perpendicular lever arm of 5.50 cm, while
the hands have a perpendicular lever arm of 1.02
m? (b) What upward force should you exert to
support the wheelbarrow and its load if their
FIGURE9.34An athlete performs full split. The center of combined mass is 55.0 kg? (c) What force does
gravity and the various distances from it are shown.
the wheel exert on the ground?
22. A typical car has an axle with radius
driving a tire with a radius of . What is its
mechanical advantage assuming the very
simplified model inFigure 9.23(b)?
23. What force does the nail puller inExercise 9.19
exert on the supporting surface? The nail puller
has a mass of 2.10 kg.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 405
9 • Problems & Exercises 387
24. If you used an ideal pulley of the type shown in 29. A device for exercising the upper leg muscle is
Figure 9.24(a) to support a car engine of mass shown inFigure 9.37, together with a schematic
, (a) What would be the tension in the rope? representation of an equivalent lever system.
(b) What force must the ceiling supply, assuming Calculate the force exerted by the upper leg
you pull straight down on the rope? Neglect the muscle to lift the mass at a constant speed.
pulley system’s mass. Explicitly show how you follow the steps in the
25. RepeatExercise 9.24for the pulley shown in Problem-Solving Strategy for static equilibrium in
Figure 9.24(c), assuming you pull straight up on Applications of Statistics, Including Problem-
the rope. The pulley system’s mass is . Solving Strategies.
9.6Forces and Torques in Muscles and
Joints
26. Verify that the force in the elbow joint inExample
9.4is 407 N, as stated in the text.
27. Two muscles in the back of the leg pull on the
Achilles tendon as shown inFigure 9.35. What
total force do they exert?
FIGURE9.37A mass is connected by pulleys and wires to
the ankle in this exercise device.
FIGURE9.35The Achilles tendon of the posterior leg serves
to attach plantaris, gastrocnemius, and soleus muscles to
calcaneus bone.
28. The upper leg muscle (quadriceps) exerts a force
of 1250 N, which is carried by a tendon over the
kneecap (the patella) at the angles shown in
Figure 9.36. Find the direction and magnitude of
the force exerted by the kneecap on the upper leg
bone (the femur).
FIGURE9.36The knee joint works like a hinge to bend and
straighten the lower leg. It permits a person to sit, stand,
and pivot.
PAGE: 406
388 9 • Problems & Exercises
30. A person working at a drafting board may hold her 32. Even when the head is held erect, as inFigure
head as shown inFigure 9.38, requiring muscle 9.39, its center of mass is not directly over the
action to support the head. The three major acting principal point of support (the atlanto-occipital
forces are shown. Calculate the direction and joint). The muscles at the back of the neck should
magnitude of the force supplied by the upper therefore exert a force to keep the head erect.
vertebrae to hold the head stationary, That is why your head falls forward when you fall
assuming that this force acts along a line through asleep in the class. (a) Calculate the force exerted
the center of mass as do the weight and muscle by these muscles using the information in the
force. figure. (b) What is the force exerted by the pivot on
the head?
FIGURE9.38
FIGURE9.39The center of mass of the head lies in front of
31. We analyzed the biceps muscle example with the its major point of support, requiring muscle action to hold
the head erect. A simplified lever system is shown.
angle between forearm and upper arm set at .
Using the same numbers as inExample 9.4, find
the force exerted by the biceps muscle when the
angle is and the forearm is in a downward
position.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 407
9 • Problems & Exercises 389
33. A 75-kg man stands on his toes by exerting an 35. Unlike most of the other muscles in our bodies,
upward force through the Achilles tendon, as in the masseter muscle in the jaw, as illustrated in
Figure 9.40. (a) What is the force in the Achilles Figure 9.42, is attached relatively far from the
tendon if he stands on one foot? (b) Calculate the joint, enabling large forces to be exerted by the
force at the pivot of the simplified lever system back teeth. (a) Using the information in the figure,
shown—that force is representative of forces in calculate the force exerted by the lower teeth on
the ankle joint. the bullet. (b) Calculate the force on the joint.
FIGURE9.42A person clenching a bullet between his teeth.
36. Integrated Concepts
FIGURE9.40The muscles in the back of the leg pull the Suppose we replace the 4.0-kg book inExercise
Achilles tendon when one stands on one’s toes. A simplified 9.31of the biceps muscle with an elastic exercise
lever system is shown.
rope that obeys Hooke’s Law. Assume its force
34. A father lifts his child as shown inFigure 9.41. constant . (a) How much is the rope
What force should the upper leg muscle exert to stretched (past equilibrium) to provide the same
lift the child at a constant speed? force as in this example? Assume the rope is
held in the hand at the same location as the book.
(b) What force is on the biceps muscle if the
exercise rope is pulled straight up so that the
forearm makes an angle of with the
horizontal? Assume the biceps muscle is still
perpendicular to the forearm.
FIGURE9.41A child being lifted by a father’s lower leg.
PAGE: 408
390 9 • Problems & Exercises
37. (a) What force should the woman inFigure 9.43 39. Unreasonable Results
exert on the floor with each hand to do a push-up? Suppose two children are using a uniform seesaw
Assume that she moves up at a constant speed. that is 3.00 m long and has its center of mass over
(b) The triceps muscle at the back of her upper the pivot. The first child has a mass of 30.0 kg and
arm has an effective lever arm of 1.75 cm, and she sits 1.40 m from the pivot. (a) Calculate where the
exerts force on the floor at a horizontal distance of second 18.0 kg child must sit to balance the
20.0 cm from the elbow joint. Calculate the seesaw. (b) What is unreasonable about the
magnitude of the force in each triceps muscle, and result? (c) Which premise is unreasonable, or
compare it to her weight. (c) How much work does which premises are inconsistent?
she do if her center of mass rises 0.240 m? (d) 40. Construct Your Own Problem
What is her useful power output if she does 25 Consider a method for measuring the mass of a
pushups in one minute? person’s arm in anatomical studies. The subject
lies on her back, extends her relaxed arm to the
side and two scales are placed below the arm.
One is placed under the elbow and the other
under the back of her hand. Construct a problem
in which you calculate the mass of the arm and
find its center of mass based on the scale readings
and the distances of the scales from the shoulder
joint. You must include a free body diagram of the
arm to direct the analysis. Consider changing the
FIGURE9.43A woman doing pushups.
position of the scale under the hand to provide
38. You have just planted a sturdy 2-m-tall palm tree more information, if needed. You may wish to
in your front lawn for your mother’s birthday. Your consult references to obtain reasonable mass
brother kicks a 500 g ball, which hits the top of the values.
tree at a speed of 5 m/s and stays in contact with
it for 10 ms. The ball falls to the ground near the
base of the tree and the recoil of the tree is
minimal. (a) What is the force on the tree? (b) The
length of the sturdy section of the root is only 20
cm. Furthermore, the soil around the roots is loose
and we can assume that an effective force is
applied at the tip of the 20 cm length. What is the
effective force exerted by the end of the tip of the
root to keep the tree from toppling? Assume the
tree will be uprooted rather than bend. (c) What
could you have done to ensure that the tree does
not uproot easily?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 409
CHAPTER 10
Rotational Motion and Angular Momentum
FIGURE10.1The mention of a tornado conjures up images of raw destructive power. Tornadoes blow houses away as if they were made of
paper and have been known to pierce tree trunks with pieces of straw. They descend from clouds in funnel-like shapes that spin violently,
particularly at the bottom where they are most narrow, producing winds as high as 500 km/h. (credit: Daphne Zaras, U.S. National Oceanic
and Atmospheric Administration)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
10.1Angular Acceleration
10.2Kinematics of Rotational Motion
10.3Dynamics of Rotational Motion: Rotational Inertia
10.4Rotational Kinetic Energy: Work and Energy Revisited
10.5Angular Momentum and Its Conservation
10.6Collisions of Extended Bodies in Two Dimensions
10.7Gyroscopic Effects: Vector Aspects of Angular Momentum
INTRODUCTION TO ROTATIONAL MOTION AND ANGULAR MOMENTUM Why do tornadoes spin at all? And why
do tornados spin so rapidly? The answer is that air masses that produce tornadoes are themselves rotating, and
when the radii of the air masses decrease, their rate of rotation increases. An ice skater increases her spin in an
exactly analogous manner as seen inFigure 10.2. The skater starts her rotation with outstretched limbs and
increases her spin by pulling them in toward her body. The same physics describes the exhilarating spin of a skater
and the wrenching force of a tornado.
Clearly, force, energy, and power are associated with rotational motion. These and other aspects of rotational
motion are covered in this chapter. We shall see that all important aspects of rotational motion either have already
been defined for linear motion or have exact analogs in linear motion. First, we look at angular acceleration—the
rotational analog of linear acceleration.
PAGE: 410
392 10 • Rotational Motion and Angular Momentum
FIGURE10.2This figure skater increases her rate of spin by pulling her arms and her extended leg closer to her axis of rotation. (credit:
Luu, Wikimedia Commons)
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/10-introduction-to-rotational-motion-
and-angular-momentum)
10.1 Angular Acceleration
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe uniform circular motion.
• Explain non-uniform circular motion.
• Calculate angular acceleration of an object.
• Observe the link between linear and angular acceleration.
Uniform Circular Motion and Gravitationdiscussed only uniform circular motion, which is motion in a circle at
constant speed and, hence, constant angular velocity. Recall that angular velocity was defined as the time rate of
change of angle :
10.1
where is the angle of rotation as seen inFigure 10.3. The relationship between angular velocity and linear
velocity was also defined inRotation Angle and Angular Velocityas
10.2
or
10.3
where is the radius of curvature, also seen inFigure 10.3. According to the sign convention, the counter clockwise
direction is considered as positive direction and clockwise direction as negative
FIGURE10.3This figure shows uniform circular motion and some of its defined quantities.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 411
10.1 • Angular Acceleration 393
Angular velocity is not constant when a skater pulls in her arms, when a child starts up a merry-go-round from rest,
or when a computer’s hard disk slows to a halt when switched off. In all these cases, there is anangular
acceleration, in which changes. The faster the change occurs, the greater the angular acceleration. Angular
acceleration is defined as the rate of change of angular velocity. In equation form, angular acceleration is
expressed as follows:
10.4
where is thechange in angular velocityand is the change in time. The units of angular acceleration are
, or . If increases, then is positive. If decreases, then is negative.
EXAMPLE 10.1
Calculating the Angular Acceleration and Deceleration of a Bike Wheel
Suppose a teenager puts her bicycle on its back and starts the rear wheel spinning from rest to a final angular
velocity of 250 rpm in 5.00 s. (a) Calculate the angular acceleration in . (b) If she now slams on the brakes,
causing an angular acceleration of , how long does it take the wheel to stop?
Strategy for (a)
The angular acceleration can be found directly from its definition in because the final angular velocity and
time are given. We see that is 250 rpm and is 5.00 s.
Solution for (a)
Entering known information into the definition of angular acceleration, we get
10.5
Because is in revolutions per minute (rpm) and we want the standard units of for angular acceleration, we
need to convert from rpm to rad/s:
10.6
Entering this quantity into the expression for , we get
10.7
Strategy for (b)
In this part, we know the angular acceleration and the initial angular velocity. We can find the stoppage time by
using the definition of angular acceleration and solving for , yielding
10.8
Solution for (b)
Here the angular velocity decreases from (250 rpm) to zero, so that is , and is given to
be . Thus,
PAGE: 412
394 10 • Rotational Motion and Angular Momentum
10.9
Discussion
Note that the angular acceleration as the girl spins the wheel is small and positive; it takes 5 s to produce an
appreciable angular velocity. When she hits the brake, the angular acceleration is large and negative. The angular
velocity quickly goes to zero. In both cases, the relationships are analogous to what happens with linear motion. For
example, there is a large deceleration when you crash into a brick wall—the velocity change is large in a short time
interval.
If the bicycle in the preceding example had been on its wheels instead of upside-down, it would first have
accelerated along the ground and then come to a stop. This connection between circular motion and linear motion
needs to be explored. For example, it would be useful to know how linear and angular acceleration are related. In
circular motion, linear acceleration istangentto the circle at the point of interest, as seen inFigure 10.4. Thus, linear
acceleration is calledtangential acceleration .
FIGURE10.4In circular motion, linear acceleration , occurs as the magnitude of the velocity changes: is tangent to the motion. In the
context of circular motion, linear acceleration is also called tangential acceleration .
Linear or tangential acceleration refers to changes in the magnitude of velocity but not its direction. We know from
Uniform Circular Motion and Gravitationthat in circular motion centripetal acceleration, , refers to changes in the
direction of the velocity but not its magnitude. An object undergoing circular motion experiences centripetal
acceleration, as seen inFigure 10.5. Thus, and are perpendicular and independent of one another. Tangential
acceleration is directly related to the angular acceleration and is linked to an increase or decrease in the
velocity, but not its direction.
FIGURE10.5Centripetal acceleration occurs as the direction of velocity changes; it is perpendicular to the circular motion. Centripetal
and tangential acceleration are thus perpendicular to each other.
Now we can find the exact relationship between linear acceleration and angular acceleration . Because linear
acceleration is proportional to a change in the magnitude of the velocity, it is defined (as it was inOne-Dimensional
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 413
10.1 • Angular Acceleration 395
Kinematics) to be
10.10
For circular motion, note that , so that
10.11
The radius is constant for circular motion, and so . Thus,
10.12
By definition, . Thus,
10.13
or
10.14
These equations mean that linear acceleration and angular acceleration are directly proportional. The greater the
angular acceleration is, the larger the linear (tangential) acceleration is, and vice versa. For example, the greater the
angular acceleration of a car’s drive wheels, the greater the acceleration of the car. The radius also matters. For
example, the smaller a wheel, the smaller its linear acceleration for a given angular acceleration .
EXAMPLE 10.2
Calculating the Angular Acceleration of a Motorcycle Wheel
A powerful motorcycle can accelerate from 0 to 30.0 m/s (about 108 km/h) in 4.20 s. What is the angular
acceleration of its 0.320-m-radius wheels? (SeeFigure 10.6.)
FIGURE10.6The linear acceleration of a motorcycle is accompanied by an angular acceleration of its wheels.
Strategy
We are given information about the linear velocities of the motorcycle. Thus, we can find its linear acceleration .
Then, the expression can be used to find the angular acceleration.
Solution
The linear acceleration is
10.15
We also know the radius of the wheels. Entering the values for and into , we get
PAGE: 414
396 10 • Rotational Motion and Angular Momentum
10.16
Discussion
Units of radians are dimensionless and appear in any relationship between angular and linear quantities.
So far, we have defined three rotational quantities— , and . These quantities are analogous to the translational
quantities , and .Table 10.1displays rotational quantities, the analogous translational quantities, and the
relationships between them.
Rotational Translational Relationship
TABLE10.1Rotational and Translational
Quantities
Making Connections: Take-Home Experiment
Sit down with your feet on the ground on a chair that rotates. Lift one of your legs such that it is unbent
(straightened out). Using the other leg, begin to rotate yourself by pushing on the ground. Stop using your leg to
push the ground but allow the chair to rotate. From the origin where you began, sketch the angle, angular
velocity, and angular acceleration of your leg as a function of time in the form of three separate graphs. Estimate
the magnitudes of these quantities.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Angular acceleration is a vector, having both magnitude and direction. How do we denote its magnitude and
direction? Illustrate with an example.
Solution
The magnitude of angular acceleration is and its most common units are . The direction of angular
acceleration along a fixed axis is denoted by a + or a – sign, just as the direction of linear acceleration in one
dimension is denoted by a + or a – sign. For example, consider a gymnast doing a forward flip. Her angular
momentum would be parallel to the mat and to her left. The magnitude of her angular acceleration would be
proportional to her angular velocity (spin rate) and her moment of inertia about her spin axis.
Ladybug Revolution
Join the ladybug in an exploration of rotational motion. Rotate the merry-go-round to change its angle, or
choose a constant angular velocity or angular acceleration. Explore how circular motion relates to the bug's x,y
position, velocity, and acceleration using vectors or graphs.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/l/28ladybugrevolutionrotation).
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 415
10.2 • Kinematics of Rotational Motion 397
10.2 Kinematics of Rotational Motion
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Observe the kinematics of rotational motion.
• Derive rotational kinematic equations.
• Evaluate problem solving strategies for rotational kinematics.
Just by using our intuition, we can begin to see how rotational quantities like , , and are related to one another.
For example, if a motorcycle wheel has a large angular acceleration for a fairly long time, it ends up spinning rapidly
and rotates through many revolutions. In more technical terms, if the wheel’s angular acceleration is large for a
long period of time , then the final angular velocity and angle of rotation are large. The wheel’s rotational
motion is exactly analogous to the fact that the motorcycle’s large translational acceleration produces a large final
velocity, and the distance traveled will also be large.
Kinematics is the description of motion. Thekinematics of rotational motiondescribes the relationships among
rotation angle, angular velocity, angular acceleration, and time. Let us start by finding an equation relating , , and
. To determine this equation, we recall a familiar kinematic equation for translational, or straight-line, motion:
10.17
Note that in rotational motion , and we shall use the symbol for tangential or linear acceleration from now
on. As in linear kinematics, we assume is constant, which means that angular acceleration is also a constant,
because . Now, let us substitute and into the linear equation above:
10.18
The radius cancels in the equation, yielding
10.19
where is the initial angular velocity. This last equation is akinematic relationshipamong , , and —that is, it
describes their relationship without reference to forces or masses that may affect rotation. It is also precisely
analogous in form to its translational counterpart.
Making Connections
Kinematics for rotational motion is completely analogous to translational kinematics, first presented inOne-
Dimensional Kinematics. Kinematics is concerned with the description of motion without regard to force or
mass. We will find that translational kinematic quantities, such as displacement, velocity, and acceleration have
direct analogs in rotational motion.
Starting with the four kinematic equations we developed inOne-Dimensional Kinematics, we can derive the
following four rotational kinematic equations (presented together with their translational counterparts):
Rotational Translational
(constant , )
(constant , )
(constant , )
TABLE10.2Rotational Kinematic Equations
PAGE: 416
398 10 • Rotational Motion and Angular Momentum
In these equations, the subscript 0 denotes initial values ( , , and are initial values), and the average angular
velocity and average velocity are defined as follows:
10.20
The equations given above inTable 10.2can be used to solve any rotational or translational kinematics problem in
which and are constant.
Problem-Solving Strategy for Rotational Kinematics
1. Examine the situation to determine that rotational kinematics (rotational motion) is involved. Rotation must
be involved, but without the need to consider forces or masses that affect the motion.
2. Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem (identify the unknowns). A sketch of the
situation is useful.
3. Make a list of what is given or can be inferred from the problem as stated (identify the knowns).
4. Solve the appropriate equation or equations for the quantity to be determined (the unknown). It can be
useful to think in terms of a translational analog because by now you are familiar with such motion.
5. Substitute the known values along with their units into the appropriate equation, and obtain numerical
solutions complete with units. Be sure to use units of radians for angles.
6. Check your answer to see if it is reasonable: Does your answer make sense?
EXAMPLE 10.3
Calculating the Acceleration of a Fishing Reel
A deep-sea fisherman hooks a big fish that swims away from the boat pulling the fishing line from his fishing reel.
The whole system is initially at rest and the fishing line unwinds from the reel at a radius of 4.50 cm from its axis of
rotation. The reel is given an angular acceleration of for 2.00 s as seen inFigure 10.7.
(a) What is the final angular velocity of the reel?
(b) At what speed is fishing line leaving the reel after 2.00 s elapses?
(c) How many revolutions does the reel make?
(d) How many meters of fishing line come off the reel in this time?
Strategy
In each part of this example, the strategy is the same as it was for solving problems in linear kinematics. In
particular, known values are identified and a relationship is then sought that can be used to solve for the unknown.
Solution for (a)
Here and are given and needs to be determined. The most straightforward equation to use is
because the unknown is already on one side and all other terms are known. That equation states that
10.21
We are also given that (it starts from rest), so that
10.22
Solution for (b)
Now that is known, the speed can most easily be found using the relationship
10.23
where the radius of the reel is given to be 4.50 cm; thus,
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 417
10.2 • Kinematics of Rotational Motion 399
10.24
Note again that radians must always be used in any calculation relating linear and angular quantities. Also, because
radians are dimensionless, we have .
Solution for (c)
Here, we are asked to find the number of revolutions. Because , we can find the number of
revolutions by finding in radians. We are given and , and we know is zero, so that can be obtained using
.
10.25
Converting radians to revolutions gives
10.26
Solution for (d)
The number of meters of fishing line is , which can be obtained through its relationship with :
10.27
Discussion
This example illustrates that relationships among rotational quantities are highly analogous to those among linear
quantities. We also see in this example how linear and rotational quantities are connected. The answers to the
questions are realistic. After unwinding for two seconds, the reel is found to spin at 220 rad/s, which is 2100 rpm.
(No wonder reels sometimes make high-pitched sounds.) The amount of fishing line played out is 9.90 m, about
right for when the big fish bites.
FIGURE10.7Fishing line coming off a rotating reel moves linearly.Example 10.3andExample 10.4consider relationships between
rotational and linear quantities associated with a fishing reel.
EXAMPLE 10.4
Calculating the Duration When the Fishing Reel Slows Down and Stops
Now let us consider what happens if the fisherman applies a brake to the spinning reel, achieving an angular
acceleration of . How long does it take the reel to come to a stop?
Strategy
We are asked to find the time for the reel to come to a stop. The initial and final conditions are different from those
in the previous problem, which involved the same fishing reel. Now we see that the initial angular velocity is
and the final angular velocity is zero. The angular acceleration is given to be .
PAGE: 418
400 10 • Rotational Motion and Angular Momentum
Examining the available equations, we see all quantities buttare known in making it easiest to use
this equation.
Solution
The equation states
10.28
We solve the equation algebraically fort, and then substitute the known values as usual, yielding
10.29
Discussion
Note that care must be taken with the signs that indicate the directions of various quantities. Also, note that the time
to stop the reel is fairly small because the acceleration is rather large. Fishing lines sometimes snap because of the
accelerations involved, and fishermen often let the fish swim for a while before applying brakes on the reel. A tired
fish will be slower, requiring a smaller acceleration.
EXAMPLE 10.5
Calculating the Slow Acceleration of Trains and Their Wheels
Large freight trains accelerate very slowly. Suppose one such train accelerates from rest, giving its 0.350-m-radius
wheels an angular acceleration of . After the wheels have made 200 revolutions (assume no slippage):
(a) How far has the train moved down the track? (b) What are the final angular velocity of the wheels and the linear
velocity of the train?
Strategy
In part (a), we are asked to find , and in (b) we are asked to find and . We are given the number of revolutions ,
the radius of the wheels , and the angular acceleration .
Solution for (a)
The distance is very easily found from the relationship between distance and rotation angle:
10.30
Solving this equation for yields
10.31
Before using this equation, we must convert the number of revolutions into radians, because we are dealing with a
relationship between linear and rotational quantities:
10.32
Now we can substitute the known values into to find the distance the train moved down the track:
10.33
Solution for (b)
We cannot use any equation that incorporates to find , because the equation would have at least two unknown
values. The equation will work, because we know the values for all variables except :
10.34
Taking the square root of this equation and entering the known values gives
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 419
10.2 • Kinematics of Rotational Motion 401
10.35
We can find the linear velocity of the train, , through its relationship to :
10.36
Discussion
The distance traveled is fairly large and the final velocity is fairly slow (just under 32 km/h).
There is translational motion even for something spinning in place, as the following example illustrates.Figure 10.8
shows a fly on the edge of a rotating microwave oven plate. The example below calculates the total distance it
travels.
FIGURE10.8The image shows a microwave plate. The fly makes revolutions while the food is heated (along with the fly).
EXAMPLE 10.6
Calculating the Distance Traveled by a Fly on the Edge of a Microwave Oven Plate
A person decides to use a microwave oven to reheat some lunch. In the process, a fly accidentally flies into the
microwave and lands on the outer edge of the rotating plate and remains there. If the plate has a radius of 0.15 m
and rotates at 6.0 rpm, calculate the total distance traveled by the fly during a 2.0-min cooking period. (Ignore the
start-up and slow-down times.)
Strategy
First, find the total number of revolutions , and then the linear distance traveled. can be used to find
because is given to be 6.0 rpm.
Solution
Entering known values into gives
10.37
As always, it is necessary to convert revolutions to radians before calculating a linear quantity like from an angular
quantity like :
10.38
Now, using the relationship between and , we can determine the distance traveled:
10.39
PAGE: 420
402 10 • Rotational Motion and Angular Momentum
Discussion
Quite a trip (if it survives)! Note that this distance is the total distance traveled by the fly. Displacement is actually
zero for complete revolutions because they bring the fly back to its original position. The distinction between total
distance traveled and displacement was first noted inOne-Dimensional Kinematics.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Rotational kinematics has many useful relationships, often expressed in equation form. Are these relationships laws
of physics or are they simply descriptive? (Hint: the same question applies to linear kinematics.)
Solution
Rotational kinematics (just like linear kinematics) is descriptive and does not represent laws of nature. With
kinematics, we can describe many things to great precision but kinematics does not consider causes. For example, a
large angular acceleration describes a very rapid change in angular velocity without any consideration of its cause.
10.3 Dynamics of Rotational Motion: Rotational Inertia
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Understand the relationship between force, mass and acceleration.
• Study the turning effect of force.
• Study the analogy between force and torque, mass and moment of inertia, and linear acceleration and
angular acceleration.
If you have ever spun a bike wheel or pushed a merry-go-round, you know that force is needed to change angular
velocity as seen inFigure 10.9. In fact, your intuition is reliable in predicting many of the factors that are involved.
For example, we know that a door opens slowly if we push too close to its hinges. Furthermore, we know that the
more massive the door, the more slowly it opens. The first example implies that the farther the force is applied from
the pivot, the greater the angular acceleration; another implication is that angular acceleration is inversely
proportional to mass. These relationships should seem very similar to the familiar relationships among force, mass,
and acceleration embodied in Newton’s second law of motion. There are, in fact, precise rotational analogs to both
force and mass.
FIGURE10.9Force is required to spin the bike wheel. The greater the force, the greater the angular acceleration produced. The more
massive the wheel, the smaller the angular acceleration. If you push on a spoke closer to the axle, the angular acceleration will be smaller.
To develop the precise relationship among force, mass, radius, and angular acceleration, consider what happens if
we exert a force on a point mass that is at a distance from a pivot point, as shown inFigure 10.10. Because
the force is perpendicular to , an acceleration is obtained in the direction of . We can rearrange this
equation such that and then look for ways to relate this expression to expressions for rotational quantities.
We note that , and we substitute this expression into , yielding
10.40
Recall thattorqueis the turning effectiveness of a force. In this case, because is perpendicular to , torque is
simply . So, if we multiply both sides of the equation above by , we get torque on the left-hand side. That is,
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 421
10.3 • Dynamics of Rotational Motion: Rotational Inertia 403
10.41
or
10.42
This last equation is the rotational analog of Newton’s second law ( ), where torque is analogous to force,
angular acceleration is analogous to translational acceleration, and is analogous to mass (or inertia). The
quantity is called therotational inertiaormoment of inertiaof a point mass a distance from the center of
rotation.
FIGURE10.10An object is supported by a horizontal frictionless table and is attached to a pivot point by a cord that supplies centripetal
force. A force is applied to the object perpendicular to the radius , causing it to accelerate about the pivot point. The force is kept
perpendicular to .
Making Connections: Rotational Motion Dynamics
Dynamics for rotational motion is completely analogous to linear or translational dynamics. Dynamics is
concerned with force and mass and their effects on motion. For rotational motion, we will find direct analogs to
force and mass that behave just as we would expect from our earlier experiences.
Rotational Inertia and Moment of Inertia
Before we can consider the rotation of anything other than a point mass like the one inFigure 10.10, we must
extend the idea of rotational inertia to all types of objects. To expand our concept of rotational inertia, we define the
moment of inertia of an object to be the sum of for all the point masses of which it is composed. That is,
. Here is analogous to in translational motion. Because of the distance , the moment of inertia for
any object depends on the chosen axis. Actually, calculating is beyond the scope of this text except for one simple
case—that of a hoop, which has all its mass at the same distance from its axis. A hoop’s moment of inertia around its
axis is therefore , where is its total mass and its radius. (We use and for an entire object to
distinguish them from and for point masses.) In all other cases, we must consultFigure 10.11(note that the
table is piece of artwork that has shapes as well as formulae) for formulas for that have been derived from
integration over the continuous body. Note that has units of mass multiplied by distance squared ( ), as we
might expect from its definition.
The general relationship among torque, moment of inertia, and angular acceleration is
10.43
or
10.44
where net is the total torque from all forces relative to a chosen axis. For simplicity, we will only consider torques
exerted by forces in the plane of the rotation. Such torques are either positive or negative and add like ordinary
numbers. The relationship in is the rotational analog to Newton’s second law and is very generally
applicable. This equation is actually valid foranytorque, applied toanyobject, relative toanyaxis.
As we might expect, the larger the torque is, the larger the angular acceleration is. For example, the harder a child
PAGE: 422
404 10 • Rotational Motion and Angular Momentum
pushes on a merry-go-round, the faster it accelerates. Furthermore, the more massive a merry-go-round, the slower
it accelerates for the same torque. The basic relationship between moment of inertia and angular acceleration is
that the larger the moment of inertia, the smaller is the angular acceleration. But there is an additional twist. The
moment of inertia depends not only on the mass of an object, but also on itsdistributionof mass relative to the axis
around which it rotates. For example, it will be much easier to accelerate a merry-go-round full of children if they
stand close to its axis than if they all stand at the outer edge. The mass is the same in both cases, but the moment of
inertia is much larger when the children are at the edge.
Take-Home Experiment
Cut out a circle that has about a 10 cm radius from stiff cardboard. Near the edge of the circle, write numbers 1
to 12 like hours on a clock face. Position the circle so that it can rotate freely about a horizontal axis through its
center, like a wheel. (You could loosely nail the circle to a wall.) Hold the circle stationary and with the number
12 positioned at the top, attach a lump of blue putty (sticky material used for fixing posters to walls) at the
number 3. How large does the lump need to be to just rotate the circle? Describe how you can change the
moment of inertia of the circle. How does this change affect the amount of blue putty needed at the number 3 to
just rotate the circle? Change the circle’s moment of inertia and then try rotating the circle by using different
amounts of blue putty. Repeat this process several times.
Problem-Solving Strategy for Rotational Dynamics
1. Examine the situation to determine that torque and mass are involved in the rotation. Draw a careful sketch
of the situation.
2. Determine the system of interest.
3. Draw a free body diagram. That is, draw and label all external forces acting on the system of interest.
4. Apply , the rotational equivalent of Newton’s second law, to solve the problem. Care
must be taken to use the correct moment of inertia and to consider the torque about the point of rotation.
5. As always, check the solution to see if it is reasonable.
Making Connections
In statics, the net torque is zero, and there is no angular acceleration. In rotational motion, net torque is the
cause of angular acceleration, exactly as in Newton’s second law of motion for rotation.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 423
10.3 • Dynamics of Rotational Motion: Rotational Inertia 405
FIGURE10.11Some rotational inertias.
EXAMPLE 10.7
Calculating the Effect of Mass Distribution on a Merry-Go-Round
Consider the father pushing a playground merry-go-round inFigure 10.12. He exerts a force of 250 N at the edge of
the 50.0-kg merry-go-round, which has a 1.50 m radius. Calculate the angular acceleration produced (a) when no
one is on the merry-go-round and (b) when an 18.0-kg child sits 1.25 m away from the center. Consider the merry-
go-round itself to be a uniform disk with negligible retarding friction.
PAGE: 424
406 10 • Rotational Motion and Angular Momentum
FIGURE10.12A father pushes a playground merry-go-round at its edge and perpendicular to its radius to achieve maximum torque.
Strategy
Angular acceleration is given directly by the expression :
10.45
To solve for , we must first calculate the torque (which is the same in both cases) and moment of inertia (which
is greater in the second case). To find the torque, we note that the applied force is perpendicular to the radius and
friction is negligible, so that
10.46
Solution for (a)
The moment of inertia of a solid disk about this axis is given inFigure 10.11to be
10.47
where and , so that
10.48
Now, after we substitute the known values, we find the angular acceleration to be
10.49
Solution for (b)
We expect the angular acceleration for the system to be less in this part, because the moment of inertia is greater
when the child is on the merry-go-round. To find the total moment of inertia , we first find the child’s moment of
inertia by considering the child to be equivalent to a point mass at a distance of 1.25 m from the axis. Then,
10.50
The total moment of inertia is the sum of moments of inertia of the merry-go-round and the child (about the same
axis). To justify this sum to yourself, examine the definition of :
10.51
Substituting known values into the equation for gives
10.52
Discussion
The angular acceleration is less when the child is on the merry-go-round than when the merry-go-round is empty, as
expected. The angular accelerations found are quite large, partly due to the fact that friction was considered to be
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 425
10.4 • Rotational Kinetic Energy: Work and Energy Revisited 407
negligible. If, for example, the father kept pushing perpendicularly for 2.00 s, he would give the merry-go-round an
angular velocity of 13.3 rad/s when it is empty but only 8.89 rad/s when the child is on it. In terms of revolutions per
second, these angular velocities are 2.12 rev/s and 1.41 rev/s, respectively. The father would end up running at
about 50 km/h in the first case. Summer Olympics, here he comes! Confirmation of these numbers is left as an
exercise for the reader.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Torque is the analog of force and moment of inertia is the analog of mass. Force and mass are physical quantities
that depend on only one factor. For example, mass is related solely to the numbers of atoms of various types in an
object. Are torque and moment of inertia similarly simple?
Solution
No. Torque depends on three factors: force magnitude, force direction, and point of application. Moment of inertia
depends on both mass and its distribution relative to the axis of rotation. So, while the analogies are precise, these
rotational quantities depend on more factors.
10.4 Rotational Kinetic Energy: Work and Energy Revisited
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Derive the equation for rotational work.
• Calculate rotational kinetic energy.
• Demonstrate the Law of Conservation of Energy.
In this module, we will learn about work and energy associated with rotational motion.Figure 10.13shows a worker
using an electric grindstone propelled by a motor. Sparks are flying, and noise and vibration are created as layers of
steel are pared from the pole. The stone continues to turn even after the motor is turned off, but it is eventually
brought to a stop by friction. Clearly, the motor had to work to get the stone spinning. This work went into heat, light,
sound, vibration, and considerablerotational kinetic energy.
FIGURE10.13The motor works in spinning the grindstone, giving it rotational kinetic energy. That energy is then converted to heat, light,
sound, and vibration. (credit: U.S. Navy photo by Mass Communication Specialist Seaman Zachary David Bell)
Work must be done to rotate objects such as grindstones or merry-go-rounds. Work was defined inUniform Circular
Motion and Gravitationfor translational motion, and we can build on that knowledge when considering work done in
rotational motion. The simplest rotational situation is one in which the net force is exerted perpendicular to the
radius of a disk (as shown inFigure 10.14) and remains perpendicular as the disk starts to rotate. The force is
parallel to the displacement, and so the net work done is the product of the force times the arc length traveled:
10.53
To get torque and other rotational quantities into the equation, we multiply and divide the right-hand side of the
equation by , and gather terms:
10.54
We recognize that and , so that
PAGE: 426
408 10 • Rotational Motion and Angular Momentum
10.55
This equation is the expression for rotational work. It is very similar to the familiar definition of translational work as
force multiplied by distance. Here, torque is analogous to force, and angle is analogous to distance. The equation
is valid in general, even though it was derived for a special case.
To get an expression for rotational kinetic energy, we must again perform some algebraic manipulations. The first
step is to note that , so that
10.56
FIGURE10.14The net force on this disk is kept perpendicular to its radius as the force causes the disk to rotate. The net work done is thus
. The net work goes into rotational kinetic energy.
Making Connections
Work and energy in rotational motion are completely analogous to work and energy in translational motion, first
presented inUniform Circular Motion and Gravitation.
Now, we solve one of the rotational kinematics equations for . We start with the equation
10.57
Next, we solve for :
10.58
Substituting this into the equation for net and gathering terms yields
10.59
This equation is thework-energy theoremfor rotational motion only. As you may recall, net work changes the
kinetic energy of a system. Through an analogy with translational motion, we define the term to be
rotational kinetic energy for an object with a moment of inertia and an angular velocity :
10.60
The expression for rotational kinetic energy is exactly analogous to translational kinetic energy, with being
analogous to and to . Rotational kinetic energy has important effects. Flywheels, for example, can be used to
store large amounts of rotational kinetic energy in a vehicle, as seen inFigure 10.15.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 427
10.4 • Rotational Kinetic Energy: Work and Energy Revisited 409
FIGURE10.15Experimental vehicles, such as this bus, have been constructed in which rotational kinetic energy is stored in a large
flywheel. When the bus goes down a hill, its transmission converts its gravitational potential energy into . It can also convert
translational kinetic energy, when the bus stops, into . The flywheel’s energy can then be used to accelerate, to go up another hill, or
to keep the bus from slowing down due to friction.
EXAMPLE 10.8
Calculating the Work and Energy for Spinning a Grindstone
Consider a person who spins a large grindstone by placing her hand on its edge and exerting a force through part of
a revolution as shown inFigure 10.16. In this example, we verify that the work done by the torque she exerts equals
the change in rotational energy. (a) How much work is done if she exerts a force of 200 N through a rotation of
? The force is kept perpendicular to the grindstone’s 0.320-m radius at the point of application, and
the effects of friction are negligible. (b) What is the final angular velocity if the grindstone has a mass of 85.0 kg? (c)
What is the final rotational kinetic energy? (It should equal the work.)
Strategy
To find the work, we can use the equation . We have enough information to calculate the torque
and are given the rotation angle. In the second part, we can find the final angular velocity using one of the kinematic
relationships. In the last part, we can calculate the rotational kinetic energy from its expression in .
Solution for (a)
The net work is expressed in the equation
10.61
where net is the applied force multiplied by the radius because there is no retarding friction, and the force is
perpendicular to . The angle is given. Substituting the given values in the equation above yields
10.62
Noting that ,
10.63
FIGURE10.16A large grindstone is given a spin by a person grasping its outer edge.
PAGE: 428
410 10 • Rotational Motion and Angular Momentum
Solution for (b)
To find from the given information requires more than one step. We start with the kinematic relationship in the
equation
10.64
Note that because we start from rest. Taking the square root of the resulting equation gives
10.65
Now we need to find . One possibility is
10.66
where the torque is
10.67
The formula for the moment of inertia for a disk is found inFigure 10.11:
10.68
Substituting the values of torque and moment of inertia into the expression for , we obtain
10.69
Now, substitute this value and the given value for into the above expression for :
10.70
Solution for (c)
The final rotational kinetic energy is
10.71
Both and were found above. Thus,
10.72
Discussion
The final rotational kinetic energy equals the work done by the torque, which confirms that the work done went into
rotational kinetic energy. We could, in fact, have used an expression for energy instead of a kinematic relation to
solve part (b). We will do this in later examples.
Helicopter pilots are quite familiar with rotational kinetic energy. They know, for example, that a point of no return
will be reached if they allow their blades to slow below a critical angular velocity during flight. The blades lose lift,
and it is impossible to immediately get the blades spinning fast enough to regain it. Rotational kinetic energy must
be supplied to the blades to get them to rotate faster, and enough energy cannot be supplied in time to avoid a
crash. Because of weight limitations, helicopter engines are too small to supply both the energy needed for lift and
to replenish the rotational kinetic energy of the blades once they have slowed down. The rotational kinetic energy is
put into them before takeoff and must not be allowed to drop below this crucial level. One possible way to avoid a
crash is to use the gravitational potential energy of the helicopter to replenish the rotational kinetic energy of the
blades by losing altitude and aligning the blades so that the helicopter is spun up in the descent. Of course, if the
helicopter’s altitude is too low, then there is insufficient time for the blade to regain lift before reaching the ground.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 429
10.4 • Rotational Kinetic Energy: Work and Energy Revisited 411
Problem-Solving Strategy for Rotational Energy
1. Determine that energy or work is involved in the rotation.
2. Determine the system of interest. A sketch usually helps.
3. Analyze the situation to determine the types of work and energy involved.
4. For closed systems, mechanical energy is conserved. That is, Note that and
may each include translational and rotational contributions.
5. For open systems, mechanical energy may not be conserved, and other forms of energy (referred to
previously as ), such as heat transfer, may enter or leave the system. Determine what they are, and
calculate them as necessary.
6. Eliminate terms wherever possible to simplify the algebra.
7. Check the answer to see if it is reasonable.
EXAMPLE 10.9
Calculating Helicopter Energies
A typical small rescue helicopter, similar to the one inFigure 10.17, has four blades, each is 4.00 m long and has a
mass of 50.0 kg. The blades can be approximated as thin rods that rotate about one end of an axis perpendicular to
their length. The helicopter has a total loaded mass of 1000 kg. (a) Calculate the rotational kinetic energy in the
blades when they rotate at 300 rpm. (b) Calculate the translational kinetic energy of the helicopter when it flies at
20.0 m/s, and compare it with the rotational energy in the blades. (c) To what height could the helicopter be raised if
all of the rotational kinetic energy could be used to lift it?
Strategy
Rotational and translational kinetic energies can be calculated from their definitions. The last part of the problem
relates to the idea that energy can change form, in this case from rotational kinetic energy to gravitational potential
energy.
Solution for (a)
The rotational kinetic energy is
10.73
We must convert the angular velocity to radians per second and calculate the moment of inertia before we can find
. The angular velocity is
10.74
The moment of inertia of one blade will be that of a thin rod rotated about its end, found inFigure 10.11. The total
is four times this moment of inertia, because there are four blades. Thus,
10.75
Entering and into the expression for rotational kinetic energy gives
10.76
Solution for (b)
Translational kinetic energy was defined inUniform Circular Motion and Gravitation. Entering the given values of
mass and velocity, we obtain
PAGE: 430
412 10 • Rotational Motion and Angular Momentum
10.77
To compare kinetic energies, we take the ratio of translational kinetic energy to rotational kinetic energy. This ratio is
10.78
Solution for (c)
At the maximum height, all rotational kinetic energy will have been converted to gravitational energy. To find this
height, we equate those two energies:
10.79
or
10.80
We now solve for and substitute known values into the resulting equation
10.81
Discussion
The ratio of translational energy to rotational kinetic energy is only 0.380. This ratio tells us that most of the kinetic
energy of the helicopter is in its spinning blades—something you probably would not suspect. The 53.7 m height to
which the helicopter could be raised with the rotational kinetic energy is also impressive, again emphasizing the
amount of rotational kinetic energy in the blades.
FIGURE10.17The first image shows how helicopters store large amounts of rotational kinetic energy in their blades. This energy must be
put into the blades before takeoff and maintained until the end of the flight. The engines do not have enough power to simultaneously
provide lift and put significant rotational energy into the blades. The second image shows a helicopter from the Auckland Westpac Rescue
Helicopter Service. Over 50,000 lives have been saved since its operations beginning in 1973. Here, a water rescue operation is shown.
(credit: 111 Emergency, Flickr)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 431
10.4 • Rotational Kinetic Energy: Work and Energy Revisited 413
Making Connections
Conservation of energy includes rotational motion, because rotational kinetic energy is another form of .
Uniform Circular Motion and Gravitationhas a detailed treatment of conservation of energy.
How Thick Is the Soup? Or Why Don’t All Objects Roll Downhill at the Same Rate?
One of the quality controls in a tomato soup factory consists of rolling filled cans down a ramp. If they roll too fast,
the soup is too thin. Why should cans of identical size and mass roll down an incline at different rates? And why
should the thickest soup roll the slowest?
The easiest way to answer these questions is to consider energy. Suppose each can starts down the ramp from rest.
Each can starting from rest means each starts with the same gravitational potential energy , which is
converted entirely to , provided each rolls without slipping. , however, can take the form of or ,
and total is the sum of the two. If a can rolls down a ramp, it puts part of its energy into rotation, leaving less for
translation. Thus, the can goes slower than it would if it slid down. Furthermore, the thin soup does not rotate,
whereas the thick soup does, because it sticks to the can. The thick soup thus puts more of the can’s original
gravitational potential energy into rotation than the thin soup, and the can rolls more slowly, as seen inFigure 10.18.
FIGURE10.18Three cans of soup with identical masses race down an incline. The first can has a low friction coating and does not roll but
just slides down the incline. It wins because it converts its entire PE into translational KE. The second and third cans both roll down the
incline without slipping. The second can contains thin soup and comes in second because part of its initial PE goes into rotating the can (but
not the thin soup). The third can contains thick soup. It comes in third because the soup rotates along with the can, taking even more of the
initial PE for rotational KE, leaving less for translational KE.
Assuming no losses due to friction, there is only one force doing work—gravity. Therefore the total work done is the
change in kinetic energy. As the cans start moving, the potential energy is changing into kinetic energy. Conservation
of energy gives
10.82
More specifically,
10.83
or
10.84
So, the initial is divided between translational kinetic energy and rotational kinetic energy; and the greater is,
the less energy goes into translation. If the can slides down without friction, then and all the energy goes into
translation; thus, the can goes faster.
Take-Home Experiment
Locate several cans each containing different types of food. First, predict which can will win the race down an
inclined plane and explain why. See if your prediction is correct. You could also do this experiment by collecting
several empty cylindrical containers of the same size and filling them with different materials such as wet or dry
sand.
PAGE: 432
414 10 • Rotational Motion and Angular Momentum
EXAMPLE 10.10
Calculating the Speed of a Cylinder Rolling Down an Incline
Calculate the final speed of a solid cylinder that rolls down a 2.00-m-high incline. The cylinder starts from rest, has a
mass of 0.750 kg, and has a radius of 4.00 cm.
Strategy
We can solve for the final velocity using conservation of energy, but we must first express rotational quantities in
terms of translational quantities to end up with as the only unknown.
Solution
Conservation of energy for this situation is written as described above:
10.85
Before we can solve for , we must get an expression for fromFigure 10.11. Because and are related (note
here that the cylinder is rolling without slipping), we must also substitute the relationship into the
expression. These substitutions yield
10.86
Interestingly, the cylinder’s radius and mass cancel, yielding
10.87
Solving algebraically, the equation for the final velocity gives
10.88
Substituting known values into the resulting expression yields
10.89
Discussion
Because and cancel, the result is valid for any solid cylinder, implying that all solid cylinders will
roll down an incline at the same rate independent of their masses and sizes. (Rolling cylinders down inclines is what
Galileo actually did to show that objects fall at the same rate independent of mass.) Note that if the cylinder slid
without friction down the incline without rolling, then the entire gravitational potential energy would go into
translational kinetic energy. Thus, and , which is 22% greater than . That is, the
cylinder would go faster at the bottom.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Analogy of Rotational and Translational Kinetic Energy Is rotational kinetic energy completely analogous to
translational kinetic energy? What, if any, are their differences? Give an example of each type of kinetic energy.
Solution
Yes, rotational and translational kinetic energy are exact analogs. They both are the energy of motion involved with
the coordinated (non-random) movement of mass relative to some reference frame. The only difference between
rotational and translational kinetic energy is that translational is straight line motion while rotational is not. An
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 433
10.5 • Angular Momentum and Its Conservation 415
example of both kinetic and translational kinetic energy is found in a bike tire while being ridden down a bike path.
The rotational motion of the tire means it has rotational kinetic energy while the movement of the bike along the
path means the tire also has translational kinetic energy. If you were to lift the front wheel of the bike and spin it
while the bike is stationary, then the wheel would have only rotational kinetic energy relative to the Earth.
10.5 Angular Momentum and Its Conservation
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Understand the analogy between angular momentum and linear momentum.
• Observe the relationship between torque and angular momentum.
• Apply the law of conservation of angular momentum.
Why does Earth keep on spinning? What started it spinning to begin with? And how does an ice skater manage to
spin faster and faster simply by pulling her arms in? Why does she not have to exert a torque to spin faster?
Questions like these have answers based in angular momentum, the rotational analog to linear momentum.
By now the pattern is clear—every rotational phenomenon has a direct translational analog. It seems quite
reasonable, then, to defineangular momentum as
10.90
This equation is an analog to the definition of linear momentum as . Units for linear momentum are
while units for angular momentum are . As we would expect, an object that has a large moment of inertia
, such as Earth, has a very large angular momentum. An object that has a large angular velocity , such as a
centrifuge, also has a rather large angular momentum.
Making Connections
Angular momentum is completely analogous to linear momentum, first presented inUniform Circular Motion and
Gravitation. It has the same implications in terms of carrying rotation forward, and it is conserved when the net
external torque is zero. Angular momentum, like linear momentum, is also a property of the atoms and
subatomic particles.
EXAMPLE 10.11
Calculating Angular Momentum of the Earth
Strategy
No information is given in the statement of the problem; so we must look up pertinent data before we can calculate
. First, according toFigure 10.11, the formula for the moment of inertia of a sphere is
10.91
so that
10.92
Earth’s mass is and its radius is . The Earth’s angular velocity is, of course,
exactly one revolution per day, but we must covert to radians per second to do the calculation in SI units.
Solution
Substituting known information into the expression for and converting to radians per second gives
PAGE: 434
416 10 • Rotational Motion and Angular Momentum
10.93
Substituting rad for rev and for 1 day gives
10.94
Discussion
This number is large, demonstrating that Earth, as expected, has a tremendous angular momentum. The answer is
approximate, because we have assumed a constant density for Earth in order to estimate its moment of inertia.
When you push a merry-go-round, spin a bike wheel, or open a door, you exert a torque. If the torque you exert is
greater than opposing torques, then the rotation accelerates, and angular momentum increases. The greater the net
torque, the more rapid the increase in . The relationship between torque and angular momentum is
10.95
This expression is exactly analogous to the relationship between force and linear momentum, . The
equation is very fundamental and broadly applicable. It is, in fact, the rotational form of Newton’s
second law.
EXAMPLE 10.12
Calculating the Torque Putting Angular Momentum Into a Rotating Food Tray
Figure 10.19shows a rotating food tray, often called a lazy Susan, being turned by a person in quest of sustenance.
Suppose the person exerts a 2.50 N force perpendicular to the lazy Susan’s 0.260-m radius for 0.150 s. (a) What is
the final angular momentum of the lazy Susan if it starts from rest, assuming friction is negligible? (b) What is the
final angular velocity of the lazy Susan, given that its mass is 4.00 kg and assuming its moment of inertia is that of a
disk?
FIGURE10.19A partygoer exerts a torque on a lazy Susan to make it rotate. The equation gives the relationship between
torque and the angular momentum produced.
Strategy
We can find the angular momentum by solving for , and using the given information to calculate the
torque. The final angular momentum equals the change in angular momentum, because the lazy Susan starts from
rest. That is, . To find the final velocity, we must calculate from the definition of in .
Solution for (a)
Solving for gives
10.96
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 435
10.5 • Angular Momentum and Its Conservation 417
Because the force is perpendicular to , we see that , so that
10.97
Solution for (b)
The final angular velocity can be calculated from the definition of angular momentum,
10.98
Solving for and substituting the formula for the moment of inertia of a disk into the resulting equation gives
10.99
And substituting known values into the preceding equation yields
10.100
Discussion
Note that the imparted angular momentum does not depend on any property of the object but only on torque and
time. The final angular velocity is equivalent to one revolution in 8.71 s (determination of the time period is left as an
exercise for the reader), which is about right for a lazy Susan.
EXAMPLE 10.13
Calculating the Torque in a Kick
The person whose leg is shown inFigure 10.20kicks his leg by exerting a 2000-N force with his upper leg muscle.
The effective perpendicular lever arm is 2.20 cm. Given the moment of inertia of the lower leg is , (a)
find the angular acceleration of the leg. (b) Neglecting the gravitational force, what is the rotational kinetic energy of
the leg after it has rotated through (1.00 rad)?
FIGURE10.20The muscle in the upper leg gives the lower leg an angular acceleration and imparts rotational kinetic energy to it by exerting
a torque about the knee. is a vector that is perpendicular to . This example examines the situation.
Strategy
The angular acceleration can be found using the rotational analog to Newton’s second law, or . The
moment of inertia is given and the torque can be found easily from the given force and perpendicular lever arm.
Once the angular acceleration is known, the final angular velocity and rotational kinetic energy can be calculated.
Solution to (a)
From the rotational analog to Newton’s second law, the angular acceleration is
PAGE: 436
418 10 • Rotational Motion and Angular Momentum
10.101
Because the force and the perpendicular lever arm are given and the leg is vertical so that its weight does not create
a torque, the net torque is thus
10.102
Substituting this value for the torque and the given value for the moment of inertia into the expression for gives
10.103
Solution to (b)
The final angular velocity can be calculated from the kinematic expression
10.104
or
10.105
because the initial angular velocity is zero. The kinetic energy of rotation is
10.106
so it is most convenient to use the value of just found and the given value for the moment of inertia. The kinetic
energy is then
10.107
Discussion
These values are reasonable for a person kicking his leg starting from the position shown. The weight of the leg can
be neglected in part (a) because it exerts no torque when the center of gravity of the lower leg is directly beneath
the pivot in the knee. In part (b), the force exerted by the upper leg is so large that its torque is much greater than
that created by the weight of the lower leg as it rotates. The rotational kinetic energy given to the lower leg is
enough that it could give a ball a significant velocity by transferring some of this energy in a kick.
Making Connections: Conservation Laws
Angular momentum, like energy and linear momentum, is conserved. This universally applicable law is another
sign of underlying unity in physical laws. Angular momentum is conserved when net external torque is zero, just
as linear momentum is conserved when the net external force is zero.
Conservation of Angular Momentum
We can now understand why Earth keeps on spinning. As we saw in the previous example, . This
equation means that, to change angular momentum, a torque must act over some period of time. Because Earth has
a large angular momentum, a large torque acting over a long time is needed to change its rate of spin. So what
external torques are there? Tidal friction exerts torque that is slowing Earth’s rotation, but tens of millions of years
must pass before the change is very significant. Recent research indicates the length of the day was 18 h some 900
million years ago. Only the tides exert significant retarding torques on Earth, and so it will continue to spin, although
ever more slowly, for many billions of years.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 437
10.5 • Angular Momentum and Its Conservation 419
What we have here is, in fact, another conservation law. If the net torque iszero, then angular momentum is
constant orconserved. We can see this rigorously by considering for the situation in which the net
torque is zero. In that case,
10.108
implying that
10.109
If the change in angular momentum is zero, then the angular momentum is constant; thus,
10.110
or
10.111
These expressions are thelaw of conservation of angular momentum. Conservation laws are as scarce as they are
important.
An example of conservation of angular momentum is seen inFigure 10.21, in which an ice skater is executing a spin.
The net torque on her is very close to zero, because there is relatively little friction between her skates and the ice
and because the friction is exerted very close to the pivot point. (Both and are small, and so is negligibly
small.) Consequently, she can spin for quite some time. She can do something else, too. She can increase her rate of
spin by pulling her arms and legs in. Why does pulling her arms and legs in increase her rate of spin? The answer is
that her angular momentum is constant, so that
10.112
Expressing this equation in terms of the moment of inertia,
10.113
where the primed quantities refer to conditions after she has pulled in her arms and reduced her moment of inertia.
Because is smaller, the angular velocity must increase to keep the angular momentum constant. The change
can be dramatic, as the following example shows.
FIGURE10.21(a) An ice skater is spinning on the tip of her skate with her arms extended. Her angular momentum is conserved because
the net torque on her is negligibly small. In the next image, her rate of spin increases greatly when she pulls in her arms, decreasing her
moment of inertia. The work she does to pull in her arms results in an increase in rotational kinetic energy.
EXAMPLE 10.14
Calculating the Angular Momentum of a Spinning Skater
Suppose an ice skater, such as the one inFigure 10.21, is spinning at 0.800 rev/ s with her arms extended. She has a
moment of inertia of with her arms extended and of with her arms close to her body.
(These moments of inertia are based on reasonable assumptions about a 60.0-kg skater.) (a) What is her angular
velocity in revolutions per second after she pulls in her arms? (b) What is her rotational kinetic energy before and
after she does this?
PAGE: 438
420 10 • Rotational Motion and Angular Momentum
Strategy
In the first part of the problem, we are looking for the skater’s angular velocity after she has pulled in her arms.
To find this quantity, we use the conservation of angular momentum and note that the moments of inertia and initial
angular velocity are given. To find the initial and final kinetic energies, we use the definition of rotational kinetic
energy given by
10.114
Solution for (a)
Because torque is negligible (as discussed above), the conservation of angular momentum given in is
applicable. Thus,
10.115
or
10.116
Solving for and substituting known values into the resulting equation gives
10.117
Solution for (b)
Rotational kinetic energy is given by
10.118
The initial value is found by substituting known values into the equation and converting the angular velocity to rad/s:
10.119
The final rotational kinetic energy is
10.120
Substituting known values into this equation gives
10.121
Discussion
In both parts, there is an impressive increase. First, the final angular velocity is large, although most world-class
skaters can achieve spin rates about this great. Second, the final kinetic energy is much greater than the initial
kinetic energy. The increase in rotational kinetic energy comes from work done by the skater in pulling in her arms.
This work is internal work that depletes some of the skater’s food energy.
There are several other examples of objects that increase their rate of spin because something reduced their
moment of inertia. Tornadoes are one example. Storm systems that create tornadoes are slowly rotating. When the
radius of rotation narrows, even in a local region, angular velocity increases, sometimes to the furious level of a
tornado. Earth is another example. Our planet was born from a huge cloud of gas and dust, the rotation of which
came from turbulence in an even larger cloud. Gravitational forces caused the cloud to contract, and the rotation
rate increased as a result. (SeeFigure 10.22.)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 439
10.6 • Collisions of Extended Bodies in Two Dimensions 421
FIGURE10.22The Solar System coalesced from a cloud of gas and dust that was originally rotating. The orbital motions and spins of the
planets are in the same direction as the original spin and conserve the angular momentum of the parent cloud.
In case of human motion, one would not expect angular momentum to be conserved when a body interacts with the
environment as its foot pushes off the ground. Astronauts floating in space aboard the International Space Station
have no angular momentum relative to the inside of the ship if they are motionless. Their bodies will continue to
have this zero value no matter how they twist about as long as they do not give themselves a push off the side of the
vessel.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Is angular momentum completely analogous to linear momentum? What, if any, are their differences?
Solution
Yes, angular and linear momentums are completely analogous. While they are exact analogs they have different
units and are not directly inter-convertible like forms of energy are.
10.6 Collisions of Extended Bodies in Two Dimensions
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Observe collisions of extended bodies in two dimensions.
• Examine collision at the point of percussion.
Bowling pins are sent flying and spinning when hit by a bowling ball—angular momentum as well as linear
momentum and energy have been imparted to the pins. (SeeFigure 10.23). Many collisions involve angular
momentum. Cars, for example, may spin and collide on ice or a wet surface. Baseball pitchers throw curves by
putting spin on the baseball. A tennis player can put a lot of top spin on the tennis ball which causes it to dive down
onto the court once it crosses the net. We now take a brief look at what happens when objects that can rotate
collide.
Consider the relatively simple collision shown inFigure 10.24, in which a disk strikes and adheres to an initially
motionless stick nailed at one end to a frictionless surface. After the collision, the two rotate about the nail. There is
an unbalanced external force on the system at the nail. This force exerts no torque because its lever arm is zero.
Angular momentum is therefore conserved in the collision. Kinetic energy is not conserved, because the collision is
inelastic. It is possible that momentum is not conserved either because the force at the nail may have a component
in the direction of the disk’s initial velocity. Let us examine a case of rotation in a collision inExample 10.15.
PAGE: 440
422 10 • Rotational Motion and Angular Momentum
FIGURE10.23The bowling ball causes the pins to fly, some of them spinning violently. (credit: Tinou Bao, Flickr)
FIGURE10.24(a) A disk slides toward a motionless stick on a frictionless surface. (b) The disk hits the stick at one end and adheres to it,
and they rotate together, pivoting around the nail. Angular momentum is conserved for this inelastic collision because the surface is
frictionless and the unbalanced external force at the nail exerts no torque.
EXAMPLE 10.15
Rotation in a Collision
Suppose the disk inFigure 10.24has a mass of 50.0 g and an initial velocity of 30.0 m/s when it strikes the stick
that is 1.20 m long and 2.00 kg.
(a) What is the angular velocity of the two after the collision?
(b) What is the kinetic energy before and after the collision?
(c) What is the total linear momentum before and after the collision?
Strategy for (a)
We can answer the first question using conservation of angular momentum as noted. Because angular momentum is
, we can solve for angular velocity.
Solution for (a)
Conservation of angular momentum states
10.122
where primed quantities stand for conditions after the collision and both momenta are calculated relative to the
pivot point. The initial angular momentum of the system of stick-disk is that of the disk just before it strikes the stick.
That is,
10.123
where is the moment of inertia of the disk and is its angular velocity around the pivot point. Now,
(taking the disk to be approximately a point mass) and , so that
10.124
After the collision,
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 441
10.6 • Collisions of Extended Bodies in Two Dimensions 423
′ ′ 10.125
It is that we wish to find. Conservation of angular momentum gives
10.126
Rearranging the equation yields
10.127
′
where is the moment of inertia of the stick and disk stuck together, which is the sum of their individual moments
of inertia about the nail.Figure 10.11gives the formula for a rod rotating around one end to be . Thus,
′ 10.128
Entering known values in this equation yields,
10.129
The value of is now entered into the expression for , which yields
10.130
Strategy for (b)
The kinetic energy before the collision is the incoming disk’s translational kinetic energy, and after the collision, it is
the rotational kinetic energy of the two stuck together.
Solution for (b)
First, we calculate the translational kinetic energy by entering given values for the mass and speed of the incoming
disk.
10.131
After the collision, the rotational kinetic energy can be found because we now know the final angular velocity and
the final moment of inertia. Thus, entering the values into the rotational kinetic energy equation gives
10.132
Strategy for (c)
The linear momentum before the collision is that of the disk. After the collision, it is the sum of the disk’s
momentum and that of the center of mass of the stick.
Solution of (c)
Before the collision, then, linear momentum is
10.133
After the collision, the disk and the stick’s center of mass move in the same direction. The total linear momentum is
that of the disk moving at a new velocity plus that of the stick’s center of mass,
which moves at half this speed because . Thus,
10.134
PAGE: 442
424 10 • Rotational Motion and Angular Momentum
Gathering similar terms in the equation yields,
10.135
so that
10.136
Substituting known values into the equation,
10.137
Discussion
First note that the kinetic energy is less after the collision, as predicted, because the collision is inelastic. More
surprising is that the momentum after the collision is actually greater than before the collision. This result can be
understood if you consider how the nail affects the stick and vice versa. Apparently, the stick pushes backward on
the nail when first struck by the disk. The nail’s reaction (consistent with Newton’s third law) is to push forward on
the stick, imparting momentum to it in the same direction in which the disk was initially moving, thereby increasing
the momentum of the system.
The above example has other implications. For example, what would happen if the disk hit very close to the nail?
Obviously, a force would be exerted on the nail in the forward direction. So, when the stick is struck at the end
farthest from the nail, a backward force is exerted on the nail, and when it is hit at the end nearest the nail, a
forward force is exerted on the nail. Thus, striking it at a certain point in between produces no force on the nail. This
intermediate point is known as thepercussion point.
An analogous situation occurs in tennis as seen inFigure 10.25. If you hit a ball with the end of your racquet, the
handle is pulled away from your hand. If you hit a ball much farther down, for example, on the shaft of the racquet,
the handle is pushed into your palm. And if you hit the ball at the racquet’s percussion point (what some people call
the “sweet spot”), then little ornoforce is exerted on your hand, and there is less vibration, reducing chances of a
tennis elbow. The same effect occurs for a baseball bat.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 443
10.6 • Collisions of Extended Bodies in Two Dimensions 425
FIGURE10.25A disk hitting a stick is compared to a tennis ball being hit by a racquet. (a) When the ball strikes the racquet near the end, a
backward force is exerted on the hand. (b) When the racquet is struck much farther down, a forward force is exerted on the hand. (c) When
the racquet is struck at the percussion point, no force is delivered to the hand.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Is rotational kinetic energy a vector? Justify your answer.
Solution
No, energy is always scalar whether motion is involved or not. No form of energy has a direction in space and you
can see that rotational kinetic energy does not depend on the direction of motion just as linear kinetic energy is
independent of the direction of motion.
PAGE: 444
426 10 • Rotational Motion and Angular Momentum
10.7 Gyroscopic Effects: Vector Aspects of Angular Momentum
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the right-hand rule to find the direction of angular velocity, momentum, and torque.
• Explain the gyroscopic effect.
• Study how Earth acts like a gigantic gyroscope.
Angular momentum is a vector and, therefore,has direction as well as magnitude. Torque affects both the direction
and the magnitude of angular momentum. What is the direction of the angular momentum of a rotating object like
the disk inFigure 10.26? The figure shows theright-hand ruleused to find the direction of both angular momentum
and angular velocity. Both and are vectors—each has direction and magnitude. Both can be represented by
arrows. The right-hand rule defines both to be perpendicular to the plane of rotation in the direction shown. Because
angular momentum is related to angular velocity by , the direction of is the same as the direction of .
Notice in the figure that both point along the axis of rotation.
FIGURE10.26Figure (a) shows a disk is rotating counterclockwise when viewed from above. Figure (b) shows the right-hand rule. The
direction of angular velocity size and angular momentum are defined to be the direction in which the thumb of your right hand points
when you curl your fingers in the direction of the disk’s rotation as shown.
Now, recall that torque changes angular momentum as expressed by
10.138
This equation means that the direction of is the same as the direction of the torque that creates it. This result
is illustrated inFigure 10.27, which shows the direction of torque and the angular momentum it creates.
Let us now consider a bicycle wheel with a couple of handles attached to it, as shown inFigure 10.28. (This device is
popular in demonstrations among physicists, because it does unexpected things.) With the wheel rotating as shown,
its angular momentum is to the woman's left. Suppose the person holding the wheel tries to rotate it as in the figure.
Her natural expectation is that the wheel will rotate in the direction she pushes it—but what happens is quite
different. The forces exerted create a torque that is horizontal toward the person, as shown inFigure 10.28(a). This
torque creates a change in angular momentum in the same direction, perpendicular to the original angular
momentum , thus changing the direction of but not the magnitude of .Figure 10.28shows how and add,
giving a new angular momentum with direction that is inclined more toward the person than before. The axis of the
wheel has thus movedperpendicular to the forces exerted on it, instead of in the expected direction.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 445
10.7 • Gyroscopic Effects: Vector Aspects of Angular Momentum 427
FIGURE10.27In figure (a), the torque is perpendicular to the plane formed by and and is the direction your right thumb would point to
if you curled your fingers in the direction of . Figure (b) shows that the direction of the torque is the same as that of the angular
momentum it produces.
FIGURE10.28In figure (a), a person holding the spinning bike wheel lifts it with her right hand and pushes down with her left hand in an
attempt to rotate the wheel. This action creates a torque directly toward her. This torque causes a change in angular momentum in
exactly the same direction. Figure (b) shows a vector diagram depicting how and add, producing a new angular momentum pointing
more toward the person. The wheel moves toward the person, perpendicular to the forces she exerts on it.
This same logic explains the behavior of gyroscopes.Figure 10.29shows the two forces acting on a spinning
gyroscope. The torque produced is perpendicular to the angular momentum, thus the direction of the torque is
changed, but not its magnitude. The gyroscopeprecessesaround a vertical axis, since the torque is always
horizontal and perpendicular to . If the gyroscope isnotspinning, it acquires angular momentum in the direction of
the torque ( ), and it rotates around a horizontal axis, falling over just as we would expect.
Earth itself acts like a gigantic gyroscope. Its angular momentum is along its axis and points at Polaris, the North
Star. But Earth is slowly precessing (once in about 26,000 years) due to the torque of the Sun and the Moon on its
nonspherical shape.
PAGE: 446
428 10 • Rotational Motion and Angular Momentum
FIGURE10.29As seen in figure (a), the forces on a spinning gyroscope are its weight and the supporting force from the stand. These forces
create a horizontal torque on the gyroscope, which create a change in angular momentum that is also horizontal. In figure (b), and
add to produce a new angular momentum with the same magnitude, but different direction, so that the gyroscope precesses in the
direction shown instead of falling over.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Rotational kinetic energy is associated with angular momentum? Does that mean that rotational kinetic energy is a
vector?
Solution
No, energy is always a scalar whether motion is involved or not. No form of energy has a direction in space and you
can see that rotational kinetic energy does not depend on the direction of motion just as linear kinetic energy is
independent of the direction of motion.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 447
10 • Glossary 429
Glossary
angular acceleration the rate of change of angular right-hand rule direction of angular velocity ω and
velocity with time angular momentum L in which the thumb of your
angular momentum the product of moment of inertia right hand points when you curl your fingers in the
and angular velocity direction of the disk’s rotation
change in angular velocity the difference between rotational inertia resistance to change of rotation.
final and initial values of angular velocity The more rotational inertia an object has, the harder
kinematics of rotational motion describes the it is to rotate
relationships among rotation angle, angular velocity, rotational kinetic energy the kinetic energy due to
angular acceleration, and time the rotation of an object. This is part of its total
law of conservation of angular momentum angular kinetic energy
momentum is conserved, i.e., the initial angular tangential acceleration the acceleration in a
momentum is equal to the final angular momentum direction tangent to the circle at the point of interest
when no external torque is applied to the system in circular motion
moment of inertia mass times the square of torque the turning effectiveness of a force
perpendicular distance from the rotation axis; for a work-energy theorem if one or more external forces
point mass, it is and, because any object act upon a rigid object, causing its kinetic energy to
can be built up from a collection of point masses, change from to , then the work done
this relationship is the basis for all other moments by the net force is equal to the change in kinetic
of inertia energy
Section Summary
10.1Angular Acceleration can derive the four rotational kinematic equations
(presented together with their translational
• Uniform circular motion is the motion with a
counterparts) seen inTable 10.2.
constant angular velocity .
• In these equations, the subscript 0 denotes initial
• In non-uniform circular motion, the velocity values ( and are initial values), and the average
changes with time and the rate of change of angular velocity and average velocity are
angular velocity (i.e. angular acceleration) is defined as follows:
.
• Linear or tangential acceleration refers to changes
in the magnitude of velocity but not its direction, 10.3Dynamics of Rotational Motion:
given as . Rotational Inertia
• For circular motion, note that , so that
• The farther the force is applied from the pivot, the
greater is the angular acceleration; angular
• The radius r is constant for circular motion, and so acceleration is inversely proportional to mass.
. Thus, • If we exert a force on a point mass that is at a
distance from a pivot point and because the
force is perpendicular to , an acceleration
• By definition, . Thus, is obtained in the direction of . We can
rearrange this equation such that
or
and then look for ways to relate this expression to
expressions for rotational quantities. We note that
, and we substitute this expression into
10.2Kinematics of Rotational Motion
, yielding
• Kinematics is the description of motion.
• The kinematics of rotational motion describes the
• Torque is the turning effectiveness of a force. In
relationships among rotation angle, angular
this case, because is perpendicular to , torque
velocity, angular acceleration, and time.
is simply . If we multiply both sides of the
• Starting with the four kinematic equations we
equation above by , we get torque on the left-
developed in theOne-Dimensional Kinematics, we
PAGE: 448
430 10 • Conceptual Questions
hand side. That is, linear momentum as . The relationship
between torque and angular momentum is
or
• Angular momentum, like energy and linear
momentum, is conserved. This universally
• The moment of inertia of an object is the sum of
applicable law is another sign of underlying unity
for all the point masses of which it is
in physical laws. Angular momentum is conserved
composed. That is,
when net external torque is zero, just as linear
momentum is conserved when the net external
• The general relationship among torque, moment of
force is zero.
inertia, and angular acceleration is
10.6Collisions of Extended Bodies in Two
or Dimensions
• Angular momentum is analogous to linear
momentum and is given by .
• Angular momentum is changed by torque,
10.4Rotational Kinetic Energy: Work and following the relationship
Energy Revisited
• Angular momentum is conserved if the net torque
is zero or
• The rotational kinetic energy for an object
. This equation is known as the
with a moment of inertia and an angular velocity
law of conservation of angular momentum, which
is given by
may be conserved in collisions.
10.7Gyroscopic Effects: Vector Aspects of
• Helicopters store large amounts of rotational
Angular Momentum
kinetic energy in their blades. This energy must be
put into the blades before takeoff and maintained • Torque is perpendicular to the plane formed by
until the end of the flight. The engines do not have and and is the direction your right thumb would
enough power to simultaneously provide lift and point if you curled the fingers of your right hand in
put significant rotational energy into the blades. the direction of . The direction of the torque is
• Work and energy in rotational motion are thus the same as that of the angular momentum it
completely analogous to work and energy in produces.
translational motion. • The gyroscope precesses around a vertical axis,
• The equation for thework-energy theoremfor since the torque is always horizontal and
rotational motion is, perpendicular to . If the gyroscope is not
spinning, it acquires angular momentum in the
direction of the torque ( ), and it rotates
10.5Angular Momentum and Its about a horizontal axis, falling over just as we
would expect.
Conservation
• Earth itself acts like a gigantic gyroscope. Its
• Every rotational phenomenon has a direct angular momentum is along its axis and points at
translational analog , likewise angular momentum Polaris, the North Star.
can be defined as
• This equation is an analog to the definition of
Conceptual Questions
10.1Angular Acceleration 2. Explain why centripetal acceleration changes the
direction of velocity in circular motion but not its
1. Analogies exist between rotational and
magnitude.
translational physical quantities. Identify the
3. In circular motion, a tangential acceleration can
rotational term analogous to each of the following:
change the magnitude of the velocity but not its
acceleration, force, mass, work, translational
direction. Explain your answer.
kinetic energy, linear momentum, impulse.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 449
10 • Conceptual Questions 431
4. Suppose a piece of food is on the edge of a rotating 10.4Rotational Kinetic Energy: Work and
microwave oven plate. Does it experience nonzero Energy Revisited
tangential acceleration, centripetal acceleration, or
10. Describe the energy transformations involved
both when: (a) The plate starts to spin? (b) The
when a yo-yo is thrown downward and then
plate rotates at constant angular velocity? (c) The
climbs back up its string to be caught in the user’s
plate slows to a halt?
hand.
11. What energy transformations are involved when a
10.3Dynamics of Rotational Motion:
dragster engine is revved, its clutch let out rapidly,
Rotational Inertia
its tires spun, and it starts to accelerate forward?
5. The moment of inertia of a long rod spun around an Describe the source and transformation of energy
axis through one end perpendicular to its length is at each step.
. Why is this moment of inertia greater than 12. The Earth has more rotational kinetic energy now
it would be if you spun a point mass at the than did the cloud of gas and dust from which it
location of the center of mass of the rod (at )? formed. Where did this energy come from?
(That would be .)
6. Why is the moment of inertia of a hoop that has a
mass and a radius greater than the moment of
inertia of a disk that has the same mass and radius?
Why is the moment of inertia of a spherical shell
that has a mass and a radius greater than that
of a solid sphere that has the same mass and
radius?
7. Give an example in which a small force exerts a
large torque. Give another example in which a large
force exerts a small torque.
8. While reducing the mass of a racing bike, the
greatest benefit is realized from reducing the mass FIGURE10.31An immense cloud of rotating gas and dust
contracted under the influence of gravity to form the Earth
of the tires and wheel rims. Why does this allow a
and in the process rotational kinetic energy increased.
racer to achieve greater accelerations than would (credit: NASA)
an identical reduction in the mass of the bicycle’s
frame?
10.5Angular Momentum and Its
Conservation
13. When you start the engine of your car with the
transmission in neutral, you notice that the car
rocks in the opposite sense of the engine’s
rotation. Explain in terms of conservation of
angular momentum. Is the angular momentum of
the car conserved for long (for more than a few
seconds)?
FIGURE10.30The image shows a side view of a racing
bicycle. Can you see evidence in the design of the wheels on
this racing bicycle that their moment of inertia has been
purposely reduced? (credit: Jesús Rodriguez)
9. A ball slides up a frictionless ramp. It is then rolled
without slipping and with the same initial velocity
up another frictionless ramp (with the same slope
angle). In which case does it reach a greater height,
and why?
PAGE: 450
432 10 • Conceptual Questions
14. Suppose a child walks from the outer edge of a rotating 21. Jet turbines spin rapidly. They are designed to fly
merry-go round to the inside. Does the angular velocity apart if something makes them seize suddenly,
of the merry-go-round increase, decrease, or remain rather than transfer angular momentum to the
the same? Explain your answer. plane’s wing, possibly tearing it off. Explain how
flying apart conserves angular momentum without
transferring it to the wing.
22. An astronaut tightens a bolt on a satellite in orbit.
He rotates in a direction opposite to that of the
bolt, and the satellite rotates in the same direction
as the bolt. Explain why. If a handhold is available
on the satellite, can this counter-rotation be
prevented? Explain your answer.
23. Competitive divers pull their limbs in and curl up
their bodies when they do flips. Just before
entering the water, they fully extend their limbs to
enter straight down. Explain the effect of both
actions on their angular velocities. Also explain
the effect on their angular momenta.
FIGURE10.32A child may jump off a merry-go-round in a variety
of directions.
15. Suppose a child gets off a rotating merry-go-
round. Does the angular velocity of the merry-go-
round increase, decrease, or remain the same if:
(a) He jumps off radially? (b) He jumps backward
to land motionless? (c) He jumps straight up and
hangs onto an overhead tree branch? (d) He jumps
off forward, tangential to the edge? Explain your
answers. (Refer toFigure 10.32).
16. Helicopters have a small propeller on their tail to
keep them from rotating in the opposite direction
of their main lifting blades. Explain in terms of FIGURE10.33The diver spins rapidly when curled up and
Newton’s third law why the helicopter body slows when she extends her limbs before entering the water.
rotates in the opposite direction to the blades. 24. Draw a free body diagram to show how a diver
17. Whenever a helicopter has two sets of lifting gains angular momentum when leaving the diving
blades, they rotate in opposite directions (and board.
there will be no tail propeller). Explain why it is
best to have the blades rotate in opposite
directions.
18. Describe how work is done by a skater pulling in
her arms during a spin. In particular, identify the
force she exerts on each arm to pull it in and the
distance each moves, noting that a component of
the force is in the direction moved. Why is angular
momentum not increased by this action?
19. When there is a global heating trend on Earth, the
atmosphere expands and the length of the day
increases very slightly. Explain why the length of a
day increases.
20. Nearly all conventional piston engines have
flywheels on them to smooth out engine vibrations
caused by the thrust of individual piston firings.
Why does the flywheel have this effect?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 451
10 • Problems & Exercises 433
25. In terms of angular momentum, what is the 27. Suppose an ice hockey puck strikes a hockey stick
advantage of giving a football or a rifle bullet a that lies flat on the ice and is free to move in any
spin when throwing or releasing it? direction. Which quantities are likely to be
conserved: angular momentum, linear
momentum, or kinetic energy (assuming the puck
and stick are very resilient)?
28. While driving his motorcycle at highway speed, a
physics student notices that pulling back lightly on
the right handlebar tips the cycle to the left and
produces a left turn. Explain why this happens.
10.7Gyroscopic Effects: Vector Aspects of
Angular Momentum
29. While driving his motorcycle at highway speed, a
physics student notices that pulling back lightly on
FIGURE10.34The image shows a view down the barrel of a
cannon, emphasizing its rifling. Rifling in the barrel of a the right handlebar tips the cycle to the left and
canon causes the projectile to spin just as is the case for produces a left turn. Explain why this happens.
rifles (hence the name for the grooves in the barrel). (credit:
Elsie esq., Flickr) 30. Gyroscopes used in guidance systems to indicate
directions in space must have an angular
momentum that does not change in direction. Yet
10.6Collisions of Extended Bodies in Two
they are often subjected to large forces and
Dimensions
accelerations. How can the direction of their
26. Describe two different collisions—one in which angular momentum be constant when they are
angular momentum is conserved, and the other in accelerated?
which it is not. Which condition determines
whether or not angular momentum is conserved in
a collision?
Problems & Exercises
10.1Angular Acceleration 4. Unreasonable Results
You are told that a basketball player spins the ball
1. At its peak, a tornado is 60.0 m in diameter and
with an angular acceleration of . (a) What
carries 500 km/h winds. What is its angular velocity
is the ball’s final angular velocity if the ball starts
in revolutions per second?
from rest and the acceleration lasts 2.00 s? (b)
2. Integrated Concepts
What is unreasonable about the result? (c) Which
An ultracentrifuge accelerates from rest to 100,000
premises are unreasonable or inconsistent?
rpm in 2.00 min. (a) What is its angular acceleration
in ? (b) What is the tangential acceleration of
10.2Kinematics of Rotational Motion
a point 9.50 cm from the axis of rotation? (c) What
is the radial acceleration in and multiples of 5. With the aid of a string, a gyroscope is accelerated
of this point at full rpm? from rest to 32 rad/s in 0.40 s.
3. Integrated Concepts (a) What is its angular acceleration in rad/s2?
You have a grindstone (a disk) that is 90.0 kg, has a (b) How many revolutions does it go through in the
0.340-m radius, and is turning at 90.0 rpm, and you process?
press a steel axe against it with a radial force of 6. Suppose a piece of dust finds itself on a CD. If the
20.0 N. (a) Assuming the kinetic coefficient of spin rate of the CD is 500 rpm, and the piece of dust
friction between steel and stone is 0.20, calculate is 4.3 cm from the center, what is the total distance
the angular acceleration of the grindstone. (b) How traveled by the dust in 3 minutes? (Ignore
many turns will the stone make before coming to accelerations due to getting the CD rotating.)
rest?
PAGE: 452
434 10 • Problems & Exercises
7. A gyroscope slows from an initial rate of 32.0 rad/s 10.3Dynamics of Rotational Motion:
at a rate of . Rotational Inertia
(a) How long does it take to come to rest?
10. This problem considers additional aspects of
(b) How many revolutions does it make before
exampleCalculating the Effect of Mass
stopping?
Distribution on a Merry-Go-Round. (a) How long
8. During a very quick stop, a car decelerates at
does it take the father to give the merry-go-round
.
an angular velocity of 1.50 rad/s? (b) How many
(a) What is the angular acceleration of its 0.280-m-
revolutions must he go through to generate this
radius tires, assuming they do not slip on the
velocity? (c) If he exerts a slowing force of 300 N
pavement?
at a radius of 1.35 m, how long would it take him
(b) How many revolutions do the tires make before
to stop them?
coming to rest, given their initial angular velocity is
11. Calculate the moment of inertia of a skater given
?
the following information. (a) The 60.0-kg skater is
(c) How long does the car take to stop completely?
approximated as a cylinder that has a 0.110-m
(d) What distance does the car travel in this time?
radius. (b) The skater with arms extended is
(e) What was the car’s initial velocity?
approximately a cylinder that is 52.5 kg, has a
(f) Do the values obtained seem reasonable,
0.110-m radius, and has two 0.900-m-long arms
considering that this stop happens very quickly?
which are 3.75 kg each and extend straight out
from the cylinder like rods rotated about their
ends.
12. The triceps muscle in the back of the upper arm
extends the forearm. This muscle in a professional
boxer exerts a force of with an
effective perpendicular lever arm of 3.00 cm,
producing an angular acceleration of the forearm
of . What is the moment of inertia of the
boxer’s forearm?
FIGURE10.35Yo-yos are amusing toys that display 13. A soccer player extends her lower leg in a kicking
significant physics and are engineered to enhance motion by exerting a force with the muscle above
performance based on physical laws. (credit: Beyond Neon,
the knee in the front of her leg. She produces an
Flickr)
angular acceleration of and her lower
9. Everyday application: Suppose a yo-yo has a center
leg has a moment of inertia of .
shaft that has a 0.250 cm radius and that its string
What is the force exerted by the muscle if its
is being pulled.
effective perpendicular lever arm is 1.90 cm?
(a) If the string is stationary and the yo-yo
14. Suppose you exert a force of 180 N tangential to a
accelerates away from it at a rate of ,
0.280-m-radius 75.0-kg grindstone (a solid disk).
what is the angular acceleration of the yo-yo?
(a)What torque is exerted? (b) What is the angular
(b) What is the angular velocity after 0.750 s if it
acceleration assuming negligible opposing
starts from rest?
friction? (c) What is the angular acceleration if
(c) The outside radius of the yo-yo is 3.50 cm. What
there is an opposing frictional force of 20.0 N
is the tangential acceleration of a point on its edge?
exerted 1.50 cm from the axis?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 453
10 • Problems & Exercises 435
15. Consider the 12.0 kg motorcycle wheel shown in 18. Starting with the formula for the moment of inertia
Figure 10.36. Assume it to be approximately an of a rod rotated around an axis through one end
annular ring with an inner radius of 0.280 m and perpendicular to its length , prove
an outer radius of 0.330 m. The motorcycle is on that the moment of inertia of a rod rotated about
its center stand, so that the wheel can spin freely. an axis through its center perpendicular to its
(a) If the drive chain exerts a force of 2200 N at a length is . You will find the graphics
radius of 5.00 cm, what is the angular acceleration inFigure 10.11useful in visualizing these
of the wheel? (b) What is the tangential rotations.
acceleration of a point on the outer edge of the 19. Unreasonable Results
tire? (c) How long, starting from rest, does it take A gymnast doing a forward flip lands on the mat
to reach an angular velocity of 80.0 rad/s? and exerts a 500-N ∙ m torque to slow their
angular velocity to zero. Their initial angular
velocity is 10.0 rad/s, and their moment of inertia
is . (a) What time is required for the
gymnast to exactly stop their spin? (b) What is
unreasonable about the result? (c) Which
premises are unreasonable or inconsistent?
20. Unreasonable Results
An advertisement claims that an 800-kg car is
aided by its 20.0-kg flywheel, which can
accelerate the car from rest to a speed of 30.0 m/
s. The flywheel is a disk with a 0.150-m radius. (a)
Calculate the angular velocity the flywheel must
have if 95.0% of its rotational energy is used to get
the car up to speed. (b) What is unreasonable
about the result? (c) Which premise is
FIGURE10.36A motorcycle wheel has a moment of inertia unreasonable or which premises are inconsistent?
approximately that of an annular ring.
10.4Rotational Kinetic Energy: Work and
16. Zorch, an archenemy of Superman, decides to
slow Earth’s rotation to once per 28.0 h by Energy Revisited
exerting an opposing force at and parallel to the
21. This problem considers energy and work aspects
equator. Superman is not immediately concerned,
ofExample 10.7—use data from that example as
because he knows Zorch can only exert a force of
needed. (a) Calculate the rotational kinetic energy
(a little greater than a Saturn V
in the merry-go-round plus child when they have
rocket’s thrust). How long must Zorch push with
an angular velocity of 20.0 rpm. (b) Using energy
this force to accomplish his goal? (This period
considerations, find the number of revolutions the
gives Superman time to devote to other villains.)
father will have to push to achieve this angular
Explicitly show how you follow the steps found in
velocity starting from rest. (c) Again, using energy
Problem-Solving Strategy for Rotational Dynamics.
considerations, calculate the force the father must
17. An automobile engine can produce 200 N ∙ m of
exert to stop the merry-go-round in two
torque. Calculate the angular acceleration
revolutions
produced if 95.0% of this torque is applied to the
22. What is the final velocity of a hoop that rolls
drive shaft, axle, and rear wheels of a car, given
without slipping down a 5.00-m-high hill, starting
the following information. The car is suspended so
from rest?
that the wheels can turn freely. Each wheel acts
23. (a) Calculate the rotational kinetic energy of Earth
like a 15.0 kg disk that has a 0.180 m radius. The
on its axis. (b) What is the rotational kinetic energy
walls of each tire act like a 2.00-kg annular ring
of Earth in its orbit around the Sun?
that has inside radius of 0.180 m and outside
24. Calculate the rotational kinetic energy in the
radius of 0.320 m. The tread of each tire acts like
motorcycle wheel (Figure 10.36) if its angular
a 10.0-kg hoop of radius 0.330 m. The 14.0-kg
velocity is 120 rad/s. Assume M = 12.0 kg, R =
1
axle acts like a rod that has a 2.00-cm radius. The
0.280 m, and R = 0.330 m.
2
30.0-kg drive shaft acts like a rod that has a
3.20-cm radius.
PAGE: 454
436 10 • Problems & Exercises
25. A baseball pitcher throws the ball in a motion 30. To develop muscle tone, a woman lifts a 2.00-kg
where there is rotation of the forearm about the weight held in her hand. She uses her biceps
elbow joint as well as other movements. If the muscle to flex the lower arm through an angle of
linear velocity of the ball relative to the elbow joint . (a) What is the angular acceleration if the
is 20.0 m/s at a distance of 0.480 m from the joint weight is 24.0 cm from the elbow joint, her
and the moment of inertia of the forearm is forearm has a moment of inertia of ,
, what is the rotational kinetic and the net force she exerts is 750 N at an
energy of the forearm? effective perpendicular lever arm of 2.00 cm? (b)
26. While punting a football, a kicker rotates her leg How much work does she do?
about the hip joint. The moment of inertia of the 31. Consider two cylinders that start down identical
leg is and its rotational kinetic inclines from rest except that one is frictionless.
energy is 175 J. (a) What is the angular velocity of Thus one cylinder rolls without slipping, while the
the leg? (b) What is the velocity of tip of the other slides frictionlessly without rolling. They
punter’s shoe if it is 1.05 m from the hip joint? (c) both travel a short distance at the bottom and
Explain how the football can be given a velocity then start up another incline. (a) Show that they
greater than the tip of the shoe (necessary for a both reach the same height on the other incline,
decent kick distance). and that this height is equal to their original
27. A bus contains a 1500 kg flywheel (a disk that has height. (b) Find the ratio of the time the rolling
a 0.600 m radius) and has a total mass of 10,000 cylinder takes to reach the height on the second
kg. (a) Calculate the angular velocity the flywheel incline to the time the sliding cylinder takes to
must have to contain enough energy to take the reach the height on the second incline. (c) Explain
bus from rest to a speed of 20.0 m/s, assuming why the time for the rolling motion is greater than
90.0% of the rotational kinetic energy can be that for the sliding motion.
transformed into translational energy. (b) How 32. What is the moment of inertia of an object that
high a hill can the bus climb with this stored rolls without slipping down a 2.00-m-high incline
energy and still have a speed of 3.00 m/s at the starting from rest, and has a final velocity of 6.00
top of the hill? Explicitly show how you follow the m/s? Express the moment of inertia as a multiple
steps in theProblem-Solving Strategy for of , where is the mass of the object and
Rotational Energy. is its radius.
28. A ball with an initial velocity of 8.00 m/s rolls up a 33. Suppose a 200-kg motorcycle has two wheels like,
hill without slipping. Treating the ball as a the one described in Problem 10.15and is
spherical shell, calculate the vertical height it heading toward a hill at a speed of 30.0 m/s. (a)
reaches. (b) Repeat the calculation for the same How high can it coast up the hill, if you neglect
ball if it slides up the hill without rolling. friction? (b) How much energy is lost to friction if
29. While exercising in a fitness center, a man lies face the motorcycle only gains an altitude of 35.0 m
down on a bench and lifts a weight with one lower before coming to rest?
leg by contacting the muscles in the back of the 34. In softball, the pitcher throws with the arm fully
upper leg. (a) Find the angular acceleration extended (straight at the elbow). In a fast pitch
produced given the mass lifted is 10.0 kg at a the ball leaves the hand with a speed of 139 km/h.
distance of 28.0 cm from the knee joint, the (a) Find the rotational kinetic energy of the
moment of inertia of the lower leg is pitcher’s arm and ball together given that the
, the muscle force is 1500 N, and its arm's moment of inertia is and the
effective perpendicular lever arm is 3.00 cm. (b) ball leaves the hand at a distance of 0.600 m from
How much work is done if the leg rotates through the pivot at the shoulder. (b) What force did the
an angle of with a constant force exerted by muscles exert to cause the arm to rotate if their
the muscle? effective perpendicular lever arm is 4.00 cm and
the ball is 0.156 kg?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 455
10 • Problems & Exercises 437
35. Construct Your Own Problem 42. Construct Your Own Problem
Consider the work done by a spinning skater Consider the Earth-Moon system. Construct a
pulling his arms in to increase his rate of spin. problem in which you calculate the total angular
Construct a problem in which you calculate the momentum of the system including the spins of
work done with a “force multiplied by distance” the Earth and the Moon on their axes and the
calculation and compare it to the skater’s increase orbital angular momentum of the Earth-Moon
in kinetic energy. system in its nearly monthly rotation. Calculate
what happens to the Moon’s orbital radius if the
10.5Angular Momentum and Its Earth’s rotation decreases due to tidal drag.
Conservation Among the things to be considered are the
amount by which the Earth’s rotation slows and
36. (a) Calculate the angular momentum of the Earth
the fact that the Moon will continue to have one
in its orbit around the Sun.
side always facing the Earth.
(b) Compare this angular momentum with the
angular momentum of Earth on its axis.
10.6Collisions of Extended Bodies in Two
37. (a) What is the angular momentum of the Moon in
Dimensions
its orbit around Earth?
(b) How does this angular momentum compare 43. RepeatExample 10.15in which the disk strikes
with the angular momentum of the Moon on its and adheres to the stick 0.100 m from the nail.
axis? Remember that the Moon keeps one side 44. RepeatExample 10.15in which the disk originally
toward Earth at all times. spins clockwise at 1000 rpm and has a radius of
(c) Discuss whether the values found in parts (a) 1.50 cm.
and (b) seem consistent with the fact that tidal 45. Twin skaters approach one another as shown in
effects with Earth have caused the Moon to rotate Figure 10.37and lock hands. (a) Calculate their
with one side always facing Earth. final angular velocity, given each had an initial
38. Suppose you start an antique car by exerting a speed of 2.50 m/s relative to the ice. Each has a
force of 300 N on its crank for 0.250 s. What mass of 70.0 kg, and each has a center of mass
angular momentum is given to the engine if the located 0.800 m from their locked hands. You may
handle of the crank is 0.300 m from the pivot and approximate their moments of inertia to be that of
the force is exerted to create maximum torque the point masses at this radius. (b) Compare the initial
entire time? kinetic energy and final kinetic energy.
39. A playground merry-go-round has a mass of 120
kg and a radius of 1.80 m and it is rotating with an
angular velocity of 0.500 rev/s. What is its angular
velocity after a 22.0-kg child gets onto it by
grabbing its outer edge? The child is initially at
rest.
40. Three children are riding on the edge of a merry-
go-round that is 100 kg, has a 1.60-m radius, and
is spinning at 20.0 rpm. The children have masses
of 22.0, 28.0, and 33.0 kg. If the child who has a
mass of 28.0 kg moves to the center of the merry-
FIGURE10.37Twin skaters approach each other with
go-round, what is the new angular velocity in rpm?
identical speeds. Then, the skaters lock hands and spin.
41. (a) Calculate the angular momentum of an ice
skater spinning at 6.00 rev/s given his moment of
inertia is . (b) He reduces his rate of
spin (his angular velocity) by extending his arms
and increasing his moment of inertia. Find the
value of his moment of inertia if his angular
velocity decreases to 1.25 rev/s. (c) Suppose
instead he keeps his arms in and allows friction of
the ice to slow him to 3.00 rev/s. What average
torque was exerted if this takes 15.0 s?
PAGE: 456
438 10 • Problems & Exercises
46. Suppose a 0.250-kg ball is thrown at 15.0 m/s to a 10.7Gyroscopic Effects: Vector Aspects of
motionless person standing on ice who catches it Angular Momentum
with an outstretched arm as shown inFigure
48. Integrated Concepts
10.38.
The axis of Earth makes a 23.5° angle with a
(a) Calculate the final linear velocity of the person,
direction perpendicular to the plane of Earth’s
given his mass is 70.0 kg.
orbit. As shown inFigure 10.39, this axis
(b) What is his angular velocity if each arm is 5.00
precesses, making one complete rotation in
kg? You may treat the ball as a point mass and
25,780 y.
treat the person's arms as uniform rods (each has
(a) Calculate the change in angular momentum in
a length of 0.900 m) and the rest of his body as a
half this time.
uniform cylinder of radius 0.180 m. Neglect the
(b) What is the average torque producing this
effect of the ball on his center of mass so that his
change in angular momentum?
center of mass remains in his geometrical center.
(c) If this torque were created by a single force (it
(c) Compare the initial and final total kinetic
is not) acting at the most effective point on the
energies.
equator, what would its magnitude be?
FIGURE10.38The figure shows the overhead view of a
person standing motionless on ice about to catch a ball.
Both arms are outstretched. After catching the ball, the
skater recoils and rotates.
47. RepeatExample 10.15in which the stick is free to
have translational motion as well as rotational
motion.
FIGURE10.39The Earth’s axis slowly precesses, always
making an angle of 23.5° with the direction perpendicular to
the plane of Earth’s orbit. The change in angular momentum
for the two shown positions is quite large, although the
magnitude is unchanged.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 457
CHAPTER 11
Fluid Statics
FIGURE11.1The fluid essential to all life has a beauty of its own. It also helps support the weight of this swimmer. (credit: Terren,
Wikimedia Commons)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
11.1What Is a Fluid?
11.2Density
11.3Pressure
11.4Variation of Pressure with Depth in a Fluid
11.5Pascal’s Principle
11.6Gauge Pressure, Absolute Pressure, and Pressure Measurement
11.7Archimedes’ Principle
11.8Cohesion and Adhesion in Liquids: Surface Tension and Capillary Action
11.9Pressures in the Body
INTRODUCTION TO FLUID STATICS Much of what we value in life is fluid: a breath of fresh winter air; the hot blue
flame in our gas cooker; the water we drink, swim in, and bathe in; the blood in our veins. What exactly is a fluid?
Can we understand fluids with the laws already presented, or will new laws emerge from their study? The physical
characteristics of static or stationary fluids and some of the laws that govern their behavior are the topics of this
chapter.Fluid Dynamics and Its Biological and Medical Applicationsexplores aspects of fluid flow.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/11-introduction-to-fluid-statics)
11.1 What Is a Fluid?
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• State the common phases of matter.
• Explain the physical characteristics of solids, liquids, and gases.
• Describe the arrangement of atoms in solids, liquids, and gases.
Matter most commonly exists as a solid, liquid, gas, or plasma; these states are known as the commonphases of
PAGE: 458
440 11 • Fluid Statics
matter. Solids have a definite shape and a specific volume, liquids have a definite volume but their shape changes
depending on the container in which they are held, gases have neither a definite shape nor a specific volume as their
molecules move to fill the container in which they are held, and plasmas also have neither definite shape nor
volume. (SeeFigure 11.2.) Liquids, gases, and plasmas are considered to be fluids because they yield to shearing
forces, whereas solids resist them. Note that the extent to which fluids yield to shearing forces (and hence flow
easily and quickly) depends on a quantity called the viscosity which is discussed in detail inViscosity and Laminar
Flow; Poiseuille’s Law. We can understand the phases of matter and what constitutes a fluid by considering the
forces between atoms that make up matter in the three phases.
FIGURE11.2(a) Atoms in a solid always have the same neighbors, held near home by forces represented here by springs. These atoms are
essentially in contact with one another. A rock is an example of a solid. This rock retains its shape because of the forces holding its atoms
together. (b) Atoms in a liquid are also in close contact but can slide over one another. Forces between them strongly resist attempts to
push them closer together and also hold them in close contact. Water is an example of a liquid. Water can flow, but it also remains in an
open container because of the forces between its atoms. (c) Atoms in a gas are separated by distances that are considerably larger than the
size of the atoms themselves, and they move about freely. A gas must be held in a closed container to prevent it from moving out freely. (d)
A plasma is composed of electrons, protons, and ions that, like gases, are spaced far apart and move about freely.
Atoms insolidsare in close contact, with forces between them that allow the atoms to vibrate but not to change
positions with neighboring atoms. (These forces can be thought of as springs that can be stretched or compressed,
but not easily broken.) Thus a solidresistsall types of stress. A solid cannot be easily deformed because the atoms
that make up the solid are not able to move about freely. Solids also resist compression, because their atoms form
part of a lattice structure in which the atoms are a relatively fixed distance apart. Under compression, the atoms
would be forced into one another. Most of the examples we have studied so far have involved solid objects which
deform very little when stressed.
Connections: Submicroscopic Explanation of Solids and Liquids
Atomic and molecular characteristics explain and underlie the macroscopic characteristics of solids and fluids.
This submicroscopic explanation is one theme of this text and is highlighted in the Things Great and Small
features inConservation of Momentum. See, for example, microscopic description of collisions and momentum
or microscopic description of pressure in a gas. This present section is devoted entirely to the submicroscopic
explanation of solids and liquids.
In contrast,liquidsdeform easily when stressed and do not spring back to their original shape once the force is
removed because the atoms are free to slide about and change neighbors—that is, theyflow(so they are a type of
fluid), with the molecules held together by their mutual attraction. When a liquid is placed in a container with no lid
on, it remains in the container (providing the container has no holes below the surface of the liquid!). Because the
atoms are closely packed, liquids, like solids, resist compression.
Atoms ingasesand charged particles inplasmasare separated by distances that are large compared with the size of
the particles. The forces between the particles are therefore very weak, except when they collide with one another.
Gases and plasmas thus not only flow (and are therefore considered to be fluids) but they are relatively easy to
compress because there is much space and little force between the particles. When placed in an open container
gases, unlike liquids, will escape. The major distinction is that gases are easily compressed, whereas liquids are not.
Plasmas are difficult to contain because they have so much energy. When discussing how substances flow, we shall
generally refer to both gases and liquids simply asfluids, and make a distinction between them only when they
behave differently.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 459
11.2 • Density 441
PHET EXPLORATIONS
States of Matter—Basics
Heat, cool, and compress atoms and molecules and watch as they change between solid, liquid, and gas phases.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/11-1-what-is-a-fluid)
11.2 Density
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define density.
• Calculate the mass of a reservoir from its density.
• Compare and contrast the densities of various substances.
Which weighs more, a ton of feathers or a ton of bricks? This old riddle plays with the distinction between mass and
density. A ton is a ton, of course; but bricks have much greater density than feathers, and so we are tempted to think
of them as heavier. (SeeFigure 11.3.)
Density, as you will see, is an important characteristic of substances. It is crucial, for example, in determining
whether an object sinks or floats in a fluid. Density is the mass per unit volume of a substance or object. In equation
form, density is defined as
11.1
where the Greek letter (rho) is the symbol for density, is the mass, and is the volume occupied by the
substance.
Density
Density is mass per unit volume.
11.2
where is the symbol for density, is the mass, and is the volume occupied by the substance.
In the riddle regarding the feathers and bricks, the masses are the same, but the volume occupied by the feathers is
much greater, since their density is much lower. The SI unit of density is , representative values are given in
Table 11.1. The metric system was originally devised so that water would have a density of , equivalent to
. Thus the basic mass unit, the kilogram, was first devised to be the mass of 1000 mL of water, which has
a volume of 1000 cm3.
or or or
Substance Substance Substance
Solids Liquids Gases
Water
Aluminum 2.7 1.000 Air
(4ºC)
TABLE11.1Densities of Various Substances
PAGE: 460
442 11 • Fluid Statics
or or or
Substance Substance Substance
Carbon
Brass 8.44 Blood 1.05
dioxide
Carbon
Copper (average) 8.8 Sea water 1.025
monoxide
Gold 19.32 Mercury 13.6 Hydrogen
Ethyl
Iron or steel 7.8 0.79 Helium
alcohol
Lead 11.3 Gasoline 0.68 Methane
Polystyrene 0.10 Glycerin 1.26 Nitrogen
Nitrous
Tungsten 19.30 Olive oil 0.92
oxide
Uranium 18.70 Oxygen
Steam
Concrete 2.30–3.0
Cork 0.24
Glass, common
2.6
(average)
Granite 2.7
Earth’s crust 3.3
Wood 0.3–0.9
Ice (0°C) 0.917
Bone 1.7–2.0
Silver 10.49
TABLE11.1Densities of Various Substances
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 461
11.2 • Density 443
FIGURE11.3A ton of feathers and a ton of bricks have the same mass, but the feathers make a much bigger pile because they have a much
lower density.
As you can see by examiningTable 11.1, the density of an object may help identify its composition. The density of
gold, for example, is about 2.5 times the density of iron, which is about 2.5 times the density of aluminum. Density
also reveals something about the phase of the matter and its substructure. Notice that the densities of liquids and
solids are roughly comparable, consistent with the fact that their atoms are in close contact. The densities of gases
are much less than those of liquids and solids, because the atoms in gases are separated by large amounts of empty
space.
Take-Home Experiment Sugar and Salt
A pile of sugar and a pile of salt look pretty similar, but which weighs more? If the volumes of both piles are the
same, any difference in mass is due to their different densities (including the air space between crystals). Which
do you think has the greater density? What values did you find? What method did you use to determine these
values?
EXAMPLE 11.1
Calculating the Mass of a Reservoir From Its Volume
A reservoir has a surface area of and an average depth of 40.0 m. What mass of water is held behind the
dam? (SeeFigure 11.4for a view of a large reservoir—the Three Gorges Dam site on the Yangtze River in central
China.)
Strategy
We can calculate the volume of the reservoir from its dimensions, and find the density of water inTable 11.1.
Then the mass can be found from the definition of density
11.3
Solution
Solving equation for gives .
The volume of the reservoir is its surface area times its average depth :
11.4
The density of water fromTable 11.1is . Substituting and into the expression for mass
gives
11.5
PAGE: 462
444 11 • Fluid Statics
Discussion
A large reservoir contains a very large mass of water. In this example, the weight of the water in the reservoir is
, where is the acceleration due to the Earth’s gravity (about ). It is reasonable to
ask whether the dam must supply a force equal to this tremendous weight. The answer is no. As we shall see in the
following sections, the force the dam must supply can be much smaller than the weight of the water it holds back.
FIGURE11.4Three Gorges Dam in central China. When completed in 2008, this became the world’s largest hydroelectric plant, generating
power equivalent to that generated by 22 average-sized nuclear power plants. The concrete dam is 181 m high and 2.3 km across. The
reservoir made by this dam is 660 km long. Over 1 million people were displaced by the creation of the reservoir. (credit: Le Grand Portage)
11.3 Pressure
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define pressure.
• Explain the relationship between pressure and force.
• Calculate force given pressure and area.
You have no doubt heard the wordpressurebeing used in relation to blood (high or low blood pressure) and in
relation to the weather (high- and low-pressure weather systems). These are only two of many examples of
pressures in fluids. Pressure is defined as
11.6
where is a force applied to an area that is perpendicular to the force.
Pressure
Pressure is defined as the force divided by the area perpendicular to the force over which the force is applied, or
11.7
A given force can have a significantly different effect depending on the area over which the force is exerted, as
shown inFigure 11.5. The SI unit for pressure is thepascal, where
11.8
In addition to the pascal, there are many other units for pressure that are in common use. In meteorology,
atmospheric pressure is often described in units of millibar (mb), where
11.9
Pounds per square inch is still sometimes used as a measure of tire pressure, and millimeters of
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 463
11.3 • Pressure 445
mercury (mm Hg) is still often used in the measurement of blood pressure. Pressure is defined for all states of
matter but is particularly important when discussing fluids.
FIGURE11.5(a) While the person being poked with the finger might be irritated, the force has little lasting effect. (b) In contrast, the same
force applied to an area the size of the sharp end of a needle is great enough to break the skin.
EXAMPLE 11.2
Calculating Force Exerted by the Air: What Force Does a Pressure Exert?
An astronaut is working outside the International Space Station where the atmospheric pressure is essentially zero.
The pressure gauge on her air tank reads . What force does the air inside the tank exert on the flat end
of the cylindrical tank, a disk 0.150 m in diameter?
Strategy
We can find the force exerted from the definition of pressure given in , provided we can find the area acted
upon.
Solution
By rearranging the definition of pressure to solve for force, we see that
11.10
Here, the pressure is given, as is the area of the end of the cylinder , given by . Thus,
11.11
Discussion
Wow! No wonder the tank must be strong. Since we found , we see that the force exerted by a pressure is
directly proportional to the area acted upon as well as the pressure itself.
The force exerted on the end of the tank is perpendicular to its inside surface. This direction is because the force is
exerted by a static or stationary fluid. We have already seen that fluids cannotwithstandshearing (sideways) forces;
they cannotexertshearing forces, either. Fluid pressure has no direction, being a scalar quantity. The forces due to
pressure have well-defined directions: they are always exerted perpendicular to any surface. (See the tire inFigure
11.6, for example.) Finally, note that pressure is exerted on all surfaces. Swimmers, as well as the tire, feel pressure
on all sides. (SeeFigure 11.7.)
PAGE: 464
446 11 • Fluid Statics
FIGURE11.6Pressure inside this tire exerts forces perpendicular to all surfaces it contacts. The arrows give representative directions and
magnitudes of the forces exerted at various points. Note that static fluids do not exert shearing forces.
FIGURE11.7Pressure is exerted on all sides of this swimmer, since the water would flow into the space he occupies if he were not there.
The arrows represent the directions and magnitudes of the forces exerted at various points on the swimmer. Note that the forces are larger
underneath, due to greater depth, giving a net upward or buoyant force that is balanced by the weight of the swimmer.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Gas Properties
Pump gas molecules to a box and see what happens as you change the volume, add or remove heat, change gravity,
and more. Measure the temperature and pressure, and discover how the properties of the gas vary in relation to
each other.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/11-3-pressure)
11.4 Variation of Pressure with Depth in a Fluid
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define pressure in terms of weight.
• Explain the variation of pressure with depth in a fluid.
• Calculate density given pressure and altitude.
If your ears have ever popped on a plane flight or ached during a deep dive in a swimming pool, you have
experienced the effect of depth on pressure in a fluid. At the Earth’s surface, the air pressure exerted on you is a
result of the weight of air above you. This pressure is reduced as you climb up in altitude and the weight of air above
you decreases. Under water, the pressure exerted on you increases with increasing depth. In this case, the pressure
being exerted upon you is a result of both the weight of water above youandthat of the atmosphere above you. You
may notice an air pressure change on an elevator ride that transports you many stories, but you need only dive a
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 465
11.4 • Variation of Pressure with Depth in a Fluid 447
meter or so below the surface of a pool to feel a pressure increase. The difference is that water is much denser than
air, about 775 times as dense.
Consider the container inFigure 11.8. Its bottom supports the weight of the fluid in it. Let us calculate the pressure
exerted on the bottom by the weight of the fluid. Thatpressureis the weight of the fluid divided by the area
supporting it (the area of the bottom of the container):
11.12
We can find the mass of the fluid from its volume and density:
11.13
The volume of the fluid is related to the dimensions of the container. It is
11.14
where is the cross-sectional area and is the depth. Combining the last two equations gives
11.15
If we enter this into the expression for pressure, we obtain
11.16
The area cancels, and rearranging the variables yields
11.17
This value is thepressure due to the weight of a fluid. The equation has general validity beyond the special
conditions under which it is derived here. Even if the container were not there, the surrounding fluid would still exert
this pressure, keeping the fluid static. Thus the equation represents the pressure due to the weight of any
fluid ofaverage density at any depth below its surface. For liquids, which are nearly incompressible, this
equation holds to great depths. For gases, which are quite compressible, one can apply this equation as long as the
density changes are small over the depth considered.Example 11.4illustrates this situation.
FIGURE11.8The bottom of this container supports the entire weight of the fluid in it. The vertical sides cannot exert an upward force on
the fluid (since it cannot withstand a shearing force), and so the bottom must support it all.
EXAMPLE 11.3
Calculating the Average Pressure and Force Exerted: What Force Must a Dam Withstand?
InExample 11.1, we calculated the mass of water in a large reservoir. We will now consider the pressure and force
acting on the dam retaining water. (SeeFigure 11.9.) The dam is 500 m wide, and the water is 80.0 m deep at the
dam. (a) What is the average pressure on the dam due to the water? (b) Calculate the force exerted against the dam
and compare it with the weight of water in the dam (previously found to be ).
PAGE: 466
448 11 • Fluid Statics
Strategy for (a)
The average pressure due to the weight of the water is the pressure at the average depth of 40.0 m, since
pressure increases linearly with depth.
Solution for (a)
The average pressure due to the weight of a fluid is
11.18
Entering the density of water fromTable 11.1and taking to be the average depth of 40.0 m, we obtain
11.19
Strategy for (b)
The force exerted on the dam by the water is the average pressure times the area of contact:
11.20
Solution for (b)
We have already found the value for . The area of the dam is , so that
11.21
Discussion
Although this force seems large, it is small compared with the weight of the water in the reservoir—in
fact, it is only of the weight. Note that the pressure found in part (a) is completely independent of the width
and length of the lake—it depends only on its average depth at the dam. Thus the force depends only on the water’s
average depth and the dimensions of the dam,noton the horizontal extent of the reservoir. In the diagram, the
thickness of the dam increases with depth to balance the increasing force due to the increasing pressure.epth to
balance the increasing force due to the increasing pressure.
FIGURE11.9The dam must withstand the force exerted against it by the water it retains. This force is small compared with the weight of
the water behind the dam.
Atmospheric pressureis another example of pressure due to the weight of a fluid, in this case due to the weight of
airabove a given height. The atmospheric pressure at the Earth’s surface varies a little due to the large-scale flow of
the atmosphere induced by the Earth’s rotation (this creates weather “highs” and “lows”). However, the average
pressure at sea level is given by thestandard atmospheric pressure , measured to be
11.22
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 467
11.4 • Variation of Pressure with Depth in a Fluid 449
This relationship means that, on average, at sea level, a column of air above of the Earth’s surface has a
weight of , equivalent to . (SeeFigure 11.10.)
FIGURE11.10Atmospheric pressure at sea level averages (equivalent to 1 atm), since the column of air over this ,
extending to the top of the atmosphere, weighs .
EXAMPLE 11.4
Calculating Average Density: How Dense Is the Air?
Calculate the average density of the atmosphere, given that it extends to an altitude of 120 km. Compare this
density with that of air listed inTable 11.1.
Strategy
If we solve for density, we see that
11.23
We then take to be atmospheric pressure, is given, and is known, and so we can use this to calculate .
Solution
Entering known values into the expression for yields
11.24
Discussion
This result is the average density of air between the Earth’s surface and the top of the Earth’s atmosphere, which
essentially ends at 120 km. The density of air at sea level is given inTable 11.1as —about 15 times its
average value. Because air is so compressible, its density has its highest value near the Earth’s surface and declines
rapidly with altitude.
EXAMPLE 11.5
Calculating Depth Below the Surface of Water: What Depth of Water Creates the Same
Pressure as the Entire Atmosphere?
Calculate the depth below the surface of water at which the pressure due to the weight of the water equals 1.00
atm.
PAGE: 468
450 11 • Fluid Statics
Strategy
We begin by solving the equation for depth :
11.25
Then we take to be 1.00 atm and to be the density of the water that creates the pressure.
Solution
Entering the known values into the expression for gives
11.26
Discussion
Just 10.3 m of water creates the same pressure as 120 km of air. Since water is nearly incompressible, we can
neglect any change in its density over this depth.
What do you suppose is thetotalpressure at a depth of 10.3 m in a swimming pool? Does the atmospheric pressure
on the water’s surface affect the pressure below? The answer is yes. This seems only logical, since both the water’s
weight and the atmosphere’s weight must be supported. So thetotalpressure at a depth of 10.3 m is 2 atm—half
from the water above and half from the air above. We shall see inPascal’s Principlethat fluid pressures always add
in this way.
11.5 Pascal’s Principle
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define pressure.
• State Pascal’s principle.
• Understand applications of Pascal’s principle.
• Derive relationships between forces in a hydraulic system.
Pressureis defined as force per unit area. Can pressure be increased in a fluid by pushing directly on the fluid? Yes,
but it is much easier if the fluid is enclosed. The heart, for example, increases blood pressure by pushing directly on
the blood in an enclosed system (valves closed in a chamber). If you try to push on a fluid in an open system, such
as a river, the fluid flows away. An enclosed fluid cannot flow away, and so pressure is more easily increased by an
applied force.
What happens to a pressure in an enclosed fluid? Since atoms in a fluid are free to move about, they transmit the
pressure to all parts of the fluid and to the walls of the container. Remarkably, the pressure is transmitted
undiminished. This phenomenon is calledPascal’s principle, because it was first clearly stated by the French
philosopher and scientist Blaise Pascal (1623–1662): A change in pressure applied to an enclosed fluid is
transmitted undiminished to all portions of the fluid and to the walls of its container.
Pascal’s Principle
A change in pressure applied to an enclosed fluid is transmitted undiminished to all portions of the fluid and to
the walls of its container.
Pascal’s principle, an experimentally verified fact, is what makes pressure so important in fluids. Since a change in
pressure is transmitted undiminished in an enclosed fluid, we often know more about pressure than other physical
quantities in fluids. Moreover, Pascal’s principle implies thatthe total pressure in a fluid is the sum of the pressures
from different sources. We shall find this fact—that pressures add—very useful.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 469
11.5 • Pascal’s Principle 451
Blaise Pascal had an interesting life in that he was home-schooled by his father who removed all of the mathematics
textbooks from his house and forbade him to study mathematics until the age of 15. This, of course, raised the boy’s
curiosity, and by the age of 12, he started to teach himself geometry. Despite this early deprivation, Pascal went on
to make major contributions in the mathematical fields of probability theory, number theory, and geometry. He is
also well known for being the inventor of the first mechanical digital calculator, in addition to his contributions in the
field of fluid statics.
Application of Pascal’s Principle
One of the most important technological applications of Pascal’s principle is found in ahydraulic system, which is an
enclosed fluid system used to exert forces. The most common hydraulic systems are those that operate car brakes.
Let us first consider the simple hydraulic system shown inFigure 11.11.
FIGURE11.11A typical hydraulic system with two fluid-filled cylinders, capped with pistons and connected by a tube called a hydraulic
line. A downward force on the left piston creates a pressure that is transmitted undiminished to all parts of the enclosed fluid. This
results in an upward force on the right piston that is larger than because the right piston has a larger area.
Relationship Between Forces in a Hydraulic System
We can derive a relationship between the forces in the simple hydraulic system shown inFigure 11.11by applying
Pascal’s principle. Note first that the two pistons in the system are at the same height, and so there will be no
difference in pressure due to a difference in depth. Now the pressure due to acting on area is simply
, as defined by . According to Pascal’s principle, this pressure is transmitted undiminished
throughout the fluid and to all walls of the container. Thus, a pressure is felt at the other piston that is equal to
. That is .
But since , we see that .
This equation relates the ratios of force to area in any hydraulic system, providing the pistons are at the same
vertical height and that friction in the system is negligible. Hydraulic systems can increase or decrease the force
applied to them. To make the force larger, the pressure is applied to a larger area. For example, if a 100-N force is
applied to the left cylinder inFigure 11.11and the right one has an area five times greater, then the force out is 500
N. Hydraulic systems are analogous to simple levers, but they have the advantage that pressure can be sent through
tortuously curved lines to several places at once.
EXAMPLE 11.6
Calculating Force of Wheel Cylinders: Pascal Puts on the Brakes
Consider the automobile hydraulic system shown inFigure 11.12.
PAGE: 470
452 11 • Fluid Statics
FIGURE11.12Hydraulic brakes use Pascal’s principle. The driver exerts a force of 100 N on the brake pedal. This force is increased by the
simple lever and again by the hydraulic system. Each of the identical wheel cylinders receives the same pressure and, therefore, creates the
same force output . The circular cross-sectional areas of the pedal and wheel cylinders are represented by and , respectively
A force of 100 N is applied to the brake pedal, which acts on the pedal cylinder through a lever. A force of 500 N is
exerted on the pedal cylinder. (The reader can verify that the force is 500 N using techniques of statics from
Applications of Statics, Including Problem-Solving Strategies.) Pressure created in the pedal cylinder is transmitted
to four wheel cylinders. The pedal cylinder has a diameter of 0.500 cm, and each wheel cylinder has a diameter of
2.50 cm. Calculate the force created at each of the wheel cylinders.
Strategy
We are given the force that is applied to the pedal cylinder. The cross-sectional areas and can be
calculated from their given diameters. Then can be used to find the force . Manipulate this
algebraically to get on one side and substitute known values:
Solution
Pascal’s principle applied to hydraulic systems is given by :
11.27
Discussion
This value is the force exerted by each of the four wheel cylinders. Note that we can add as many wheel cylinders as
we wish. If each has a 2.50-cm diameter, each will exert
A simple hydraulic system, such as a simple machine, can increase force but cannot do more work than done on it.
Work is force times distance moved, and the wheel cylinder moves through a smaller distance than the pedal
cylinder. Furthermore, the more wheels added, the smaller the distance each moves. Many hydraulic systems—such
as power brakes and those in bulldozers—have a motorized pump that actually does most of the work in the system.
The movement of the legs of a spider is achieved partly by hydraulics. Using hydraulics, a jumping spider can create
a force that makes it capable of jumping 25 times its length!
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 471
11.6 • Gauge Pressure, Absolute Pressure, and Pressure Measurement 453
Making Connections: Conservation of Energy
Conservation of energy applied to a hydraulic system tells us that the system cannot do more work than is done
on it. Work transfers energy, and so the work output cannot exceed the work input. Power brakes and other
similar hydraulic systems use pumps to supply extra energy when needed.
11.6 Gauge Pressure, Absolute Pressure, and Pressure Measurement
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define gauge pressure and absolute pressure.
• Understand the working of aneroid and open-tube barometers.
If you limp into a gas station with a nearly flat tire, you will notice the tire gauge on the airline reads nearly zero
when you begin to fill it. In fact, if there were a gaping hole in your tire, the gauge would read zero, even though
atmospheric pressure exists in the tire. Why does the gauge read zero? There is no mystery here. Tire gauges are
simply designed to read zero at atmospheric pressure and positive when pressure is greater than atmospheric.
Similarly, atmospheric pressure adds to blood pressure in every part of the circulatory system. (As noted inPascal’s
Principle, the total pressure in a fluid is the sum of the pressures from different sources—here, the heart and the
atmosphere.) But atmospheric pressure has no net effect on blood flow since it adds to the pressure coming out of
the heart and going back into it, too. What is important is how muchgreaterblood pressure is than atmospheric
pressure. Blood pressure measurements, like tire pressures, are thus made relative to atmospheric pressure.
In brief, it is very common for pressure gauges to ignore atmospheric pressure—that is, to read zero at atmospheric
pressure. We therefore definegauge pressureto be the pressure relative to atmospheric pressure. Gauge pressure
is positive for pressures above atmospheric pressure, and negative for pressures below it.
Gauge Pressure
Gauge pressure is the pressure relative to atmospheric pressure. Gauge pressure is positive for pressures above
atmospheric pressure, and negative for pressures below it.
In fact, atmospheric pressure does add to the pressure in any fluid not enclosed in a rigid container. This happens
because of Pascal’s principle. The total pressure, orabsolute pressure, is thus the sum of gauge pressure and
atmospheric pressure: where is absolute pressure, is gauge pressure, and is
atmospheric pressure. For example, if your tire gauge reads 34 psi (pounds per square inch), then the absolute
pressure is 34 psi plus 14.7 psi ( in psi), or 48.7 psi (equivalent to 336 kPa).
Absolute Pressure
Absolute pressure is the sum of gauge pressure and atmospheric pressure.
For reasons we will explore later, in most cases the absolute pressure in fluids cannot be negative. Fluids push
rather than pull, so the smallest absolute pressure is zero. (A negative absolute pressure is a pull.) Thus the smallest
possible gauge pressure is (this makes zero). There is no theoretical limit to how large a gauge
pressure can be.
There are a host of devices for measuring pressure, ranging from tire gauges to blood pressure cuffs. Pascal’s
principle is of major importance in these devices. The undiminished transmission of pressure through a fluid allows
precise remote sensing of pressures. Remote sensing is often more convenient than putting a measuring device into
a system, such as a person’s artery.
Figure 11.13shows one of the many types of mechanical pressure gauges in use today. In all mechanical pressure
PAGE: 472
454 11 • Fluid Statics
gauges, pressure results in a force that is converted (or transduced) into some type of readout.
FIGURE11.13This aneroid gauge utilizes flexible bellows connected to a mechanical indicator to measure pressure.
An entire class of gauges uses the property that pressure due to the weight of a fluid is given by Consider
the U-shaped tube shown inFigure 11.14, for example. This simple tube is called amanometer. InFigure 11.14(a),
both sides of the tube are open to the atmosphere. Atmospheric pressure therefore pushes down on each side
equally so its effect cancels. If the fluid is deeper on one side, there is a greater pressure on the deeper side, and the
fluid flows away from that side until the depths are equal.
Let us examine how a manometer is used to measure pressure. Suppose one side of the U-tube is connected to
some source of pressure such as the toy balloon inFigure 11.14(b) or the vacuum-packed peanut jar shown in
Figure 11.14(c). Pressure is transmitted undiminished to the manometer, and the fluid levels are no longer equal. In
Figure 11.14(b), is greater than atmospheric pressure, whereas inFigure 11.14(c), is less than
atmospheric pressure. In both cases, differs from atmospheric pressure by an amount , where is the
density of the fluid in the manometer. InFigure 11.14(b), can support a column of fluid of height , and so it
must exert a pressure greater than atmospheric pressure (the gauge pressure is positive). InFigure
11.14(c), atmospheric pressure can support a column of fluid of height , and so is less than atmospheric
pressure by an amount (the gauge pressure is negative). A manometer with one side open to the
atmosphere is an ideal device for measuring gauge pressures. The gauge pressure is and is found by
measuring .
FIGURE11.14An open-tube manometer has one side open to the atmosphere. (a) Fluid depth must be the same on both sides, or the
pressure each side exerts at the bottom will be unequal and there will be flow from the deeper side. (b) A positive gauge pressure
transmitted to one side of the manometer can support a column of fluid of height . (c) Similarly, atmospheric pressure is greater than a
negative gauge pressure by an amount . The jar’s rigidity prevents atmospheric pressure from being transmitted to the peanuts.
Mercury manometers are often used to measure arterial blood pressure. An inflatable cuff is placed on the upper
arm as shown inFigure 11.15. By squeezing the bulb, the person making the measurement exerts pressure, which is
transmitted undiminished to both the main artery in the arm and the manometer. When this applied pressure
exceeds blood pressure, blood flow below the cuff is cut off. The person making the measurement then slowly
lowers the applied pressure and listens for blood flow to resume. Blood pressure pulsates because of the pumping
action of the heart, reaching a maximum, calledsystolic pressure, and a minimum, calleddiastolic pressure, with
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 473
11.6 • Gauge Pressure, Absolute Pressure, and Pressure Measurement 455
each heartbeat. Systolic pressure is measured by noting the value of when blood flow first begins as cuff pressure
is lowered. Diastolic pressure is measured by noting when blood flows without interruption. The typical blood
pressure of a young adult raises the mercury to a height of 120 mm at systolic and 80 mm at diastolic. This is
commonly quoted as 120 over 80, or 120/80. The first pressure is representative of the maximum output of the
heart; the second is due to the elasticity of the arteries in maintaining the pressure between beats. The density of
the mercury fluid in the manometer is 13.6 times greater than water, so the height of the fluid will be 1/13.6 of that
in a water manometer. This reduced height can make measurements difficult, so mercury manometers are used to
measure larger pressures, such as blood pressure. The density of mercury is such that .
Systolic Pressure
Systolic pressure is the maximum blood pressure.
Diastolic Pressure
Diastolic pressure is the minimum blood pressure.
FIGURE11.15In routine blood pressure measurements, an inflatable cuff is placed on the upper arm at the same level as the heart. Blood
flow is detected just below the cuff, and corresponding pressures are transmitted to a mercury-filled manometer. (credit: U.S. Army photo
by Spc. Micah E. Clare\4TH BCT)
EXAMPLE 11.7
Calculating Height of IV Bag: Blood Pressure and Intravenous Infusions
Intravenous infusions are usually made with the help of the gravitational force. Assuming that the density of the
PAGE: 474
456 11 • Fluid Statics
fluid being administered is 1.00 g/ml, at what height should the IV bag be placed above the entry point so that the
fluid just enters the vein if the blood pressure in the vein is 18 mm Hg above atmospheric pressure? Assume that the
IV bag is collapsible.
Strategy for (a)
For the fluid to just enter the vein, its pressure at entry must exceed the blood pressure in the vein (18 mm Hg above
atmospheric pressure). We therefore need to find the height of fluid that corresponds to this gauge pressure.
Solution
We first need to convert the pressure into SI units. Since ,
11.28
Rearranging for gives . Substituting known values into this equation gives
11.29
Discussion
The IV bag must be placed at 0.24 m above the entry point into the arm for the fluid to just enter the arm. Generally,
IV bags are placed higher than this. You may have noticed that the bags used for blood collection are placed below
the donor to allow blood to flow easily from the arm to the bag, which is the opposite direction of flow than required
in the example presented here.
Abarometeris a device that measures atmospheric pressure. A mercury barometer is shown inFigure 11.16. This
device measures atmospheric pressure, rather than gauge pressure, because there is a nearly pure vacuum above
the mercury in the tube. The height of the mercury is such that . When atmospheric pressure varies, the
mercury rises or falls, giving important clues to weather forecasters. The barometer can also be used as an
altimeter, since average atmospheric pressure varies with altitude. Mercury barometers and manometers are so
common that units of mm Hg are often quoted for atmospheric pressure and blood pressures.Table 11.2gives
conversion factors for some of the more commonly used units of pressure.
FIGURE11.16A mercury barometer measures atmospheric pressure. The pressure due to the mercury’s weight, , equals atmospheric
pressure. The atmosphere is able to force mercury in the tube to a height because the pressure above the mercury is zero.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 475
11.7 • Archimedes’ Principle 457
Conversion to N/m2(Pa) Conversion from atm
TABLE11.2Conversion Factors for Various Pressure Units
11.7 Archimedes’ Principle
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define buoyant force.
• State Archimedes’ principle.
• Understand why objects float or sink.
• Understand the relationship between density and Archimedes’ principle.
When you rise from lounging in a warm bath, your arms feel strangely heavy. This is because you no longer have the
buoyant support of the water. Where does this buoyant force come from? Why is it that some things float and others
do not? Do objects that sink get any support at all from the fluid? Is your body buoyed by the atmosphere, or are
only helium balloons affected? (SeeFigure 11.17.)
FIGURE11.17(a) Even objects that sink, like this anchor, are partly supported by water when submerged. (b) Submarines have adjustable
density (ballast tanks) so that they may float or sink as desired. (credit: Allied Navy) (c) Helium-filled balloons tug upward on their strings,
demonstrating air’s buoyant effect. (credit: Crystl)
Answers to all these questions, and many others, are based on the fact that pressure increases with depth in a fluid.
This means that the upward force on the bottom of an object in a fluid is greater than the downward force on the top
of the object. There is a net upward, orbuoyant forceon any object in any fluid. (SeeFigure 11.18.) If the buoyant
force is greater than the object’s weight, the object will rise to the surface and float. If the buoyant force is less than
PAGE: 476
458 11 • Fluid Statics
the object’s weight, the object will sink. If the buoyant force equals the object’s weight, the object will remain
suspended at that depth. The buoyant force is always present whether the object floats, sinks, or is suspended in a
fluid.
Buoyant Force
The buoyant force is the net upward force on any object in any fluid.
FIGURE11.18Pressure due to the weight of a fluid increases with depth since . This pressure and associated upward force on the
bottom of the cylinder are greater than the downward force on the top of the cylinder. Their difference is the buoyant force . (Horizontal
forces cancel.)
Just how great is this buoyant force? To answer this question, think about what happens when a submerged object
is removed from a fluid, as inFigure 11.19.
FIGURE11.19(a) An object submerged in a fluid experiences a buoyant force . If is greater than the weight of the object, the object
will rise. If is less than the weight of the object, the object will sink. (b) If the object is removed, it is replaced by fluid having weight .
Since this weight is supported by surrounding fluid, the buoyant force must equal the weight of the fluid displaced. That is, ,a
statement of Archimedes’ principle.
The space it occupied is filled by fluid having a weight . This weight is supported by the surrounding fluid, and so
the buoyant force must equal , the weight of the fluid displaced by the object. It is a tribute to the genius of the
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 477
11.7 • Archimedes’ Principle 459
Greek mathematician and inventor Archimedes (ca. 287–212 B.C.) that he stated this principle long before concepts
of force were well established. Stated in words,Archimedes’ principleis as follows: The buoyant force on an object
equals the weight of the fluid it displaces. In equation form, Archimedes’ principle is
11.30
where is the buoyant force and is the weight of the fluid displaced by the object. Archimedes’ principle is
valid in general, for any object in any fluid, whether partially or totally submerged.
Archimedes’ Principle
According to this principle the buoyant force on an object equals the weight of the fluid it displaces. In equation
form, Archimedes’ principle is
11.31
where is the buoyant force and is the weight of the fluid displaced by the object.
Humm …High-tech body swimsuits were introduced in 2008 in preparation for the Beijing Olympics. One concern
(and international rule) was that these suits should not provide any buoyancy advantage. How do you think that this
rule could be verified?
Making Connections: Take-Home Investigation
The density of aluminum foil is 2.7 times the density of water. Take a piece of foil, roll it up into a ball and drop it
into water. Does it sink? Why or why not? Can you make it sink?
Floating and Sinking
Drop a lump of clay in water. It will sink. Then mold the lump of clay into the shape of a boat, and it will float.
Because of its shape, the boat displaces more water than the lump and experiences a greater buoyant force. The
same is true of steel ships.
EXAMPLE 11.8
Calculating buoyant force: dependency on shape
(a) Calculate the buoyant force on 10,000 metric tons of solid steel completely submerged in water,
and compare this with the steel’s weight. (b) What is the maximum buoyant force that water could exert on this
same steel if it were shaped into a boat that could displace of water?
Strategy for (a)
To find the buoyant force, we must find the weight of water displaced. We can do this by using the densities of water
and steel given inTable 11.1. We note that, since the steel is completely submerged, its volume and the water’s
volume are the same. Once we know the volume of water, we can find its mass and weight.
Solution for (a)
First, we use the definition of density to find the steel’s volume, and then we substitute values for mass and
density. This gives
11.32
Because the steel is completely submerged, this is also the volume of water displaced, . We can now find the
mass of water displaced from the relationship between its volume and density, both of which are known. This gives
PAGE: 478
460 11 • Fluid Statics
11.33
By Archimedes’ principle, the weight of water displaced is , so the buoyant force is
11.34
The steel’s weight is , which is much greater than the buoyant force, so the steel will remain
submerged. Note that the buoyant force is rounded to two digits because the density of steel is given to only two
digits.
Strategy for (b)
Here we are given the maximum volume of water the steel boat can displace. The buoyant force is the weight of this
volume of water.
Solution for (b)
The mass of water displaced is found from its relationship to density and volume, both of which are known. That is,
11.35
The maximum buoyant force is the weight of this much water, or
11.36
Discussion
The maximum buoyant force is ten times the weight of the steel, meaning the ship can carry a load nine times its
own weight without sinking.
Making Connections: Take-Home Investigation
A piece of household aluminum foil is 0.016 mm thick. Use a piece of foil that measures 10 cm by 15 cm. (a)
What is the mass of this amount of foil? (b) If the foil is folded to give it four sides, and paper clips or washers are
added to this “boat,” what shape of the boat would allow it to hold the most “cargo” when placed in water? Test
your prediction.
Density and Archimedes’ Principle
Density plays a crucial role in Archimedes’ principle. The average density of an object is what ultimately determines
whether it floats. If its average density is less than that of the surrounding fluid, it will float. This is because the fluid,
having a higher density, contains more mass and hence more weight in the same volume. The buoyant force, which
equals the weight of the fluid displaced, is thus greater than the weight of the object. Likewise, an object denser
than the fluid will sink.
The extent to which a floating object is submerged depends on how the object’s density is related to that of the
fluid. InFigure 11.20, for example, the unloaded ship has a lower density and less of it is submerged compared with
the same ship loaded. We can derive a quantitative expression for the fraction submerged by considering density.
The fraction submerged is the ratio of the volume submerged to the volume of the object, or
11.37
The volume submerged equals the volume of fluid displaced, which we call . Now we can obtain the relationship
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 479
11.7 • Archimedes’ Principle 461
between the densities by substituting into the expression. This gives
11.38
where is the average density of the object and is the density of the fluid. Since the object floats, its mass
and that of the displaced fluid are equal, and so they cancel from the equation, leaving
11.39
FIGURE11.20An unloaded ship (a) floats higher in the water than a loaded ship (b).
We use this last relationship to measure densities. This is done by measuring the fraction of a floating object that is
submerged—for example, with a hydrometer. It is useful to define the ratio of the density of an object to a fluid
(usually water) asspecific gravity:
11.40
where is the average density of the object or substance and is the density of water at 4.00°C. Specific gravity is
dimensionless, independent of whatever units are used for . If an object floats, its specific gravity is less than one.
If it sinks, its specific gravity is greater than one. Moreover, the fraction of a floating object that is submerged equals
its specific gravity. If an object’s specific gravity is exactly 1, then it will remain suspended in the fluid, neither
sinking nor floating. Scuba divers try to obtain this state so that they can hover in the water. We measure the specific
gravity of fluids, such as battery acid, radiator fluid, and urine, as an indicator of their condition. One device for
measuring specific gravity is shown inFigure 11.21.
Specific Gravity
Specific gravity is the ratio of the density of an object to a fluid (usually water).
FIGURE11.21This hydrometer is floating in a fluid of specific gravity 0.87. The glass hydrometer is filled with air and weighted with lead at
the bottom. It floats highest in the densest fluids and has been calibrated and labeled so that specific gravity can be read from it directly.
PAGE: 480
462 11 • Fluid Statics
EXAMPLE 11.9
Calculating Average Density: Floating Woman
Suppose a 60.0-kg woman floats in freshwater with of her volume submerged when her lungs are full of air.
What is her average density?
Strategy
We can find the woman’s density by solving the equation
11.41
for the density of the object. This yields
11.42
We know both the fraction submerged and the density of water, and so we can calculate the woman’s density.
Solution
Entering the known values into the expression for her density, we obtain
11.43
Discussion
Her density is less than the fluid density. We expect this because she floats. Body density is one indicator of a
person’s percent body fat, of interest in medical diagnostics and athletic training. (SeeFigure 11.22.)
FIGURE11.22Subject in a hydrostatis weighing device, where they are weighed while completely submerged as part of a body density
determination. The subject must completely empty their lungs and hold a metal weight in order to sink. Corrections are made for the
residual air in the lungs (measured separately) and the metal weight. Their corrected submerged weight, their weight in air, and pinch tests
of strategic fatty areas are used to calculate the percent body fat.
There are many obvious examples of lower-density objects or substances floating in higher-density fluids—oil on
water, a hot-air balloon, a bit of cork in wine, an iceberg, and hot wax in a “lava lamp,” to name a few. Less obvious
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 481
11.7 • Archimedes’ Principle 463
examples include lava rising in a volcano and mountain ranges floating on the higher-density crust and mantle
beneath them. Even seemingly solid Earth has fluid characteristics.
More Density Measurements
One of the most common techniques for determining density is shown inFigure 11.23.
FIGURE11.23(a) A coin is weighed in air. (b) The apparent weight of the coin is determined while it is completely submerged in a fluid of
known density. These two measurements are used to calculate the density of the coin.
An object, here a coin, is weighed in air and then weighed again while submerged in a liquid. The density of the coin,
an indication of its authenticity, can be calculated if the fluid density is known. This same technique can also be
used to determine the density of the fluid if the density of the coin is known. All of these calculations are based on
Archimedes’ principle.
Archimedes’ principle states that the buoyant force on the object equals the weight of the fluid displaced. This, in
turn, means that the objectappearsto weigh less when submerged; we call this measurement the object’sapparent
weight. The object suffers anapparent weight lossequal to the weight of the fluid displaced. Alternatively, on
balances that measure mass, the object suffers anapparent mass lossequal to the mass of fluid displaced. That is
11.44
or
11.45
The next example illustrates the use of this technique.
EXAMPLE 11.10
Calculating Density: Is the Coin Authentic?
The mass of an ancient Greek coin is determined in air to be 8.630 g. When the coin is submerged in water as shown
inFigure 11.23, its apparent mass is 7.800 g. Calculate its density, given that water has a density of
and that effects caused by the wire suspending the coin are negligible.
Strategy
To calculate the coin’s density, we need its mass (which is given) and its volume. The volume of the coin equals the
volume of water displaced. The volume of water displaced can be found by solving the equation for density
for .
Solution
The volume of water is where is the mass of water displaced. As noted, the mass of the water
displaced equals the apparent mass loss, which is . Thus the volume of water is
. This is also the volume of the coin, since it is completely submerged. We can now
find the density of the coin using the definition of density:
PAGE: 482
464 11 • Fluid Statics
11.46
Discussion
You can see fromTable 11.1that this density is very close to that of pure silver, appropriate for this type of ancient
coin. Most modern counterfeits are not pure silver.
This brings us back to Archimedes’ principle and how it came into being. As the story goes, the king of Syracuse
gave Archimedes the task of determining whether the royal crown maker was supplying a crown of pure gold. The
purity of gold is difficult to determine by color (it can be diluted with other metals and still look as yellow as pure
gold), and other analytical techniques had not yet been conceived. Even ancient peoples, however, realized that the
density of gold was greater than that of any other then-known substance. Archimedes purportedly agonized over his
task and had his inspiration one day while at the public baths, pondering the support the water gave his body. He
came up with his now-famous principle, saw how to apply it to determine density, and ran naked down the streets of
Syracuse crying “Eureka!” (Greek for “I have found it”). Similar behavior can be observed in contemporary physicists
from time to time!
11.8 Cohesion and Adhesion in Liquids: Surface Tension and Capillary Action
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Understand cohesive and adhesive forces.
• Define surface tension.
• Understand capillary action.
Cohesion and Adhesion in Liquids
Children blow soap bubbles and play in the spray of a sprinkler on a hot summer day. (SeeFigure 11.24.) An
underwater spider keeps his air supply in a shiny bubble he carries wrapped around him. A technician draws blood
into a small-diameter tube just by touching it to a drop on a pricked finger. A premature infant struggles to inflate her
lungs. What is the common thread? All these activities are dominated by the attractive forces between atoms and
molecules in liquids—both within a liquid and between the liquid and its surroundings.
Attractive forces between molecules of the same type are calledcohesive forces. Liquids can, for example, be held
in open containers because cohesive forces hold the molecules together. Attractive forces between molecules of
different types are calledadhesive forces. Such forces cause liquid drops to cling to window panes, for example. In
this section we examine effects directly attributable to cohesive and adhesive forces in liquids.
Cohesive Forces
Attractive forces between molecules of the same type are called cohesive forces.
Adhesive Forces
Attractive forces between molecules of different types are called adhesive forces.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 483
11.8 • Cohesion and Adhesion in Liquids: Surface Tension and Capillary Action 465
FIGURE11.24The soap bubbles in this photograph are caused by cohesive forces among molecules in liquids. (credit: Steve Ford Elliott)
Surface Tension
Cohesive forces between molecules cause the surface of a liquid to contract to the smallest possible surface area.
This general effect is calledsurface tension. Molecules on the surface are pulled inward by cohesive forces,
reducing the surface area. Molecules inside the liquid experience zero net force, since they have neighbors on all
sides.
Surface Tension
Cohesive forces between molecules cause the surface of a liquid to contract to the smallest possible surface
area. This general effect is called surface tension.
Making Connections: Surface Tension
Forces between atoms and molecules underlie the macroscopic effect called surface tension. These attractive
forces pull the molecules closer together and tend to minimize the surface area. This is another example of a
submicroscopic explanation for a macroscopic phenomenon.
The model of a liquid surface acting like a stretched elastic sheet can effectively explain surface tension effects. For
example, some insects can walk on water (as opposed to floating in it) as we would walk on a trampoline—they dent
the surface as shown inFigure 11.25(a).Figure 11.25(b) shows another example, where a needle rests on a water
surface. The iron needle cannot, and does not, float, because its density is greater than that of water. Rather, its
weight is supported by forces in the stretched surface that try to make the surface smaller or flatter. If the needle
were placed point down on the surface, its weight acting on a smaller area would break the surface, and it would
sink.
PAGE: 484
466 11 • Fluid Statics
FIGURE11.25Surface tension supporting the weight of an insect and an iron needle, both of which rest on the surface without penetrating
it. They are not floating; rather, they are supported by the surface of the liquid. (a) An insect leg dents the water surface. is a restoring
force (surface tension) parallel to the surface. (b) An iron needle similarly dents a water surface until the restoring force (surface tension)
grows to equal its weight.
Surface tension is proportional to the strength of the cohesive force, which varies with the type of liquid. Surface
tension is defined to be the forceFper unit length exerted by a stretched liquid membrane:
11.47
Table 11.3lists values of for some liquids. For the insect ofFigure 11.25(a), its weight is supported by the
upward components of the surface tension force: , where is the circumference of the insect’s foot in
contact with the water.Figure 11.26shows one way to measure surface tension. The liquid film exerts a force on the
movable wire in an attempt to reduce its surface area. The magnitude of this force depends on the surface tension
of the liquid and can be measured accurately.
Surface tension is the reason why liquids form bubbles and droplets. The inward surface tension force causes
bubbles to be approximately spherical and raises the pressure of the gas trapped inside relative to atmospheric
pressure outside. It can be shown that the gauge pressure inside a spherical bubble is given by
11.48
where is the radius of the bubble. Thus the pressure inside a bubble is greatest when the bubble is the smallest.
Another bit of evidence for this is illustrated inFigure 11.27. When air is allowed to flow between two balloons of
unequal size, the smaller balloon tends to collapse, filling the larger balloon.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 485
11.8 • Cohesion and Adhesion in Liquids: Surface Tension and Capillary Action 467
FIGURE11.26Sliding wire device used for measuring surface tension; the device exerts a force to reduce the film’s surface area. The force
needed to hold the wire in place is , since there aretwoliquid surfaces attached to the wire. This force remains nearly
constant as the film is stretched, until the film approaches its breaking point.
FIGURE11.27With the valve closed, two balloons of different sizes are attached to each end of a tube. Upon opening the valve, the smaller
balloon decreases in size with the air moving to fill the larger balloon. The pressure in a spherical balloon is inversely proportional to its
radius, so that the smaller balloon has a greater internal pressure than the larger balloon, resulting in this flow.
Liquid Surface tension γ(N/m)
Water at 0.0756
Water at 0.0728
Water at 0.0589
Soapy water (typical) 0.0370
Ethyl alcohol 0.0223
Glycerin 0.0631
Mercury 0.465
TABLE11.3Surface Tension of Some Liquids 1
1 At 20ºC unless otherwise stated.
PAGE: 486
468 11 • Fluid Statics
Liquid Surface tension γ(N/m)
Olive oil 0.032
Tissue fluids (typical) 0.050
Blood, whole at 0.058
Blood plasma at 0.073
Gold at 1.000
Oxygen at 0.0157
Helium at 0.00012
TABLE11.3Surface Tension of Some Liquids 1
EXAMPLE 11.11
Surface Tension: Pressure Inside a Bubble
Calculate the gauge pressure inside a soap bubble in radius using the surface tension for soapy
water inTable 11.3. Convert this pressure to mm Hg.
Strategy
The radius is given and the surface tension can be found inTable 11.3, and so can be found directly from the
equation .
Solution
Substituting and into the equation , we obtain
11.49
We use a conversion factor to get this into units of mm Hg:
11.50
Discussion
Note that if a hole were to be made in the bubble, the air would be forced out, the bubble would decrease in radius,
and the gauge pressure would reduce to zero, and the absolute pressure inside woulddecreaseto atmospheric
pressure (760 mm Hg).
Our lungs contain hundreds of millions of mucus-lined sacs calledalveoli, which are very similar in size, and about
0.1 mm in diameter. (SeeFigure 11.28.) You can exhale without muscle action by allowing surface tension to
contract these sacs. Medical patients whose breathing is aided by a positive pressure respirator have air blown into
the lungs, but are generally allowed to exhale on their own. Even if there is paralysis, surface tension in the alveoli
will expel air from the lungs. Since pressure increases as the radii of the alveoli decrease, an occasional deep
cleansing breath is needed to fully reinflate the alveoli. Respirators are programmed to do this and we find it natural,
as do our companion dogs and cats, to take a cleansing breath before settling into a nap.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 487
11.8 • Cohesion and Adhesion in Liquids: Surface Tension and Capillary Action 469
FIGURE11.28Bronchial tubes in the lungs branch into ever-smaller structures, finally ending in alveoli. The alveoli act like tiny bubbles.
The surface tension of their mucous lining aids in exhalation and can prevent inhalation if too great.
The tension in the walls of the alveoli results from the membrane tissue and a liquid on the walls of the alveoli
containing a long lipoprotein that acts as a surfactant (a surface-tension reducing substance). The need for the
surfactant results from the tendency of small alveoli to collapse and the air to fill into the larger alveoli making them
even larger (as demonstrated inFigure 11.27). During inhalation, the lipoprotein molecules are pulled apart and the
wall tension increases as the radius increases (increased surface tension). During exhalation, the molecules slide
back together and the surface tension decreases, helping to prevent a collapse of the alveoli. The surfactant
therefore serves to change the wall tension so that small alveoli don’t collapse and large alveoli are prevented from
expanding too much. This tension change is a unique property of these surfactants, and is not shared by detergents
(which simply lower surface tension). (SeeFigure 11.29.)
FIGURE11.29Surface tension as a function of surface area. The surface tension for lung surfactant decreases with decreasing area. This
ensures that small alveoli don’t collapse and large alveoli are not able to over expand.
If water gets into the lungs, the surface tension is too great and you cannot inhale. This is a severe problem in
resuscitating drowning victims. A similar problem occurs in newborn infants who are born without this
surfactant—their lungs are very difficult to inflate. This condition is known ashyaline membrane diseaseand is a
leading cause of death for infants, particularly in premature births. Some success has been achieved in treating
hyaline membrane disease by spraying a surfactant into the infant’s breathing passages. Emphysema produces the
opposite problem with alveoli. Alveolar walls of emphysema victims deteriorate, and the sacs combine to form
larger sacs. Because pressure produced by surface tension decreases with increasing radius, these larger sacs
produce smaller pressure, reducing the ability of emphysema victims to exhale. A common test for emphysema is to
measure the pressure and volume of air that can be exhaled.
Making Connections: Take-Home Investigation
(1) Try floating a sewing needle on water. In order for this activity to work, the needle needs to be very clean as
even the oil from your fingers can be sufficient to affect the surface properties of the needle. (2) Place the
bristles of a paint brush into water. Pull the brush out and notice that for a short while, the bristles will stick
PAGE: 488
470 11 • Fluid Statics
together. The surface tension of the water surrounding the bristles is sufficient to hold the bristles together. As
the bristles dry out, the surface tension effect dissipates. (3) Place a loop of thread on the surface of still water
in such a way that all of the thread is in contact with the water. Note the shape of the loop. Now place a drop of
detergent into the middle of the loop. What happens to the shape of the loop? Why? (4) Sprinkle pepper onto the
surface of water. Add a drop of detergent. What happens? Why? (5) Float two matches parallel to each other and
add a drop of detergent between them. What happens? Note: For each new experiment, the water needs to be
replaced and the bowl washed to free it of any residual detergent.
Adhesion and Capillary Action
Why is it that water beads up on a waxed car but does not on bare paint? The answer is that the adhesive forces
between water and wax are much smaller than those between water and paint. Competition between the forces of
adhesion and cohesion are important in the macroscopic behavior of liquids. An important factor in studying the
roles of these two forces is the angle between the tangent to the liquid surface and the surface. (SeeFigure
11.30.) Thecontact angle is directly related to the relative strength of the cohesive and adhesive forces. The
larger the strength of the cohesive force relative to the adhesive force, the larger is, and the more the liquid tends
to form a droplet. The smaller is, the smaller the relative strength, so that the adhesive force is able to flatten the
drop.Table 11.4lists contact angles for several combinations of liquids and solids.
Contact Angle
The angle between the tangent to the liquid surface and the surface is called the contact angle.
FIGURE11.30In the photograph, water beads on the waxed car paint and flattens on the unwaxed paint. (a) Water forms beads on the
waxed surface because the cohesive forces responsible for surface tension are larger than the adhesive forces, which tend to flatten the
drop. (b) Water beads on bare paint are flattened considerably because the adhesive forces between water and paint are strong,
overcoming surface tension. The contact angle is directly related to the relative strengths of the cohesive and adhesive forces. The larger
is, the larger the ratio of cohesive to adhesive forces. (credit: P. P. Urone)
One important phenomenon related to the relative strength of cohesive and adhesive forces iscapillary action—the
tendency of a fluid to be raised or suppressed in a narrow tube, orcapillary tube. This action causes blood to be
drawn into a small-diameter tube when the tube touches a drop.
Capillary Action
The tendency of a fluid to be raised or suppressed in a narrow tube, or capillary tube, is called capillary action.
If a capillary tube is placed vertically into a liquid, as shown inFigure 11.31, capillary action will raise or suppress
the liquid inside the tube depending on the combination of substances. The actual effect depends on the relative
strength of the cohesive and adhesive forces and, thus, the contact angle given in the table. If is less than ,
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 489
11.8 • Cohesion and Adhesion in Liquids: Surface Tension and Capillary Action 471
then the fluid will be raised; if is greater than , it will be suppressed. Mercury, for example, has a very large
surface tension and a large contact angle with glass. When placed in a tube, the surface of a column of mercury
curves downward, somewhat like a drop. The curved surface of a fluid in a tube is called ameniscus. The tendency
of surface tension is always to reduce the surface area. Surface tension thus flattens the curved liquid surface in a
capillary tube. This results in a downward force in mercury and an upward force in water, as seen inFigure 11.31.
FIGURE11.31(a) Mercury is suppressed in a glass tube because its contact angle is greater than . Surface tension exerts a downward
force as it flattens the mercury, suppressing it in the tube. The dashed line shows the shape the mercury surface would have without the
flattening effect of surface tension. (b) Water is raised in a glass tube because its contact angle is nearly . Surface tension therefore exerts
an upward force when it flattens the surface to reduce its area.
Interface Contact angle Θ
Mercury–glass
Water–glass
Water–paraffin
Water–silver
Organic liquids (most)–glass
Ethyl alcohol–glass
Kerosene–glass
TABLE11.4Contact Angles of Some Substances
Capillary action can move liquids horizontally over very large distances, but the height to which it can raise or
suppress a liquid in a tube is limited by its weight. It can be shown that this height is given by
11.51
If we look at the different factors in this expression, we might see how it makes good sense. The height is directly
PAGE: 490
472 11 • Fluid Statics
proportional to the surface tension , which is its direct cause. Furthermore, the height is inversely proportional to
tube radius—the smaller the radius , the higher the fluid can be raised, since a smaller tube holds less mass. The
height is also inversely proportional to fluid density , since a larger density means a greater mass in the same
volume. (SeeFigure 11.32.)
FIGURE11.32(a) Capillary action depends on the radius of a tube. The smaller the tube, the greater the height reached. The height is
negligible for large-radius tubes. (b) A denser fluid in the same tube rises to a smaller height, all other factors being the same.
EXAMPLE 11.12
Calculating Radius of a Capillary Tube: Capillary Action: Tree Sap
Can capillary action be solely responsible for sap rising in trees? To answer this question, calculate the radius of a
capillary tube that would raise sap 100 m to the top of a giant redwood, assuming that sap’s density is ,
its contact angle is zero, and its surface tension is the same as that of water at .
Strategy
The height to which a liquid will rise as a result of capillary action is given by , and every quantity is
known except for .
Solution
Solving for and substituting known values produces
11.52
Discussion
This result is unreasonable. Sap in trees moves through thexylem, which forms tubes with radii as small as
. This value is about 180 times as large as the radius found necessary here to raise sap . This
means that capillary action alone cannot be solely responsible for sap getting to the tops of trees.
Howdoessap get to the tops of tall trees? (Recall that a column of water can only rise to a height of 10 m when
there is a vacuum at the top—seeExample 11.5.) The question has not been completely resolved, but it appears that
it is pulled up like a chain held together by cohesive forces. As each molecule of sap enters a leaf and evaporates (a
process called transpiration), the entire chain is pulled up a notch. So a negative pressure created by water
evaporation must be present to pull the sap up through the xylem vessels. In most situations,fluids can push but
can exert only negligible pull, because the cohesive forces seem to be too small to hold the molecules tightly
together. But in this case, the cohesive force of water molecules provides a very strong pull.Figure 11.33shows one
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 491
11.9 • Pressures in the Body 473
device for studying negative pressure. Some experiments have demonstrated that negative pressures sufficient to
pull sap to the tops of the tallest treescanbe achieved.
FIGURE11.33(a) When the piston is raised, it stretches the liquid slightly, putting it under tension and creating a negative absolute
pressure . (b) The liquid eventually separates, giving an experimental limit to negative pressure in this liquid.
11.9 Pressures in the Body
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the concept of pressure the in human body.
• Explain systolic and diastolic blood pressures.
• Describe pressures in the eye, lungs, spinal column, bladder, and skeletal system.
Pressure in the Body
Next to taking a person’s temperature and weight, measuring blood pressure is the most common of all medical
examinations. Control of high blood pressure is largely responsible for the significant decreases in heart attack and
stroke fatalities achieved in the last three decades. The pressures in various parts of the body can be measured and
often provide valuable medical indicators. In this section, we consider a few examples together with some of the
physics that accompanies them.
Table 11.5lists some of the measured pressures in mm Hg, the units most commonly quoted.
Body system Gauge pressure in mm Hg
Blood pressures in large arteries (resting)
Maximum (systolic) 100–140
Minimum (diastolic) 60–90
Blood pressure in large veins 4–15
Eye 12–24
Brain and spinal fluid (lying down) 5–12
Bladder
TABLE11.5Typical Pressures in Humans
PAGE: 492
474 11 • Fluid Statics
Body system Gauge pressure in mm Hg
While filling 0–25
When full 100–150
Chest cavity between lungs and ribs −8 to −4
Inside lungs −2 to +3
Digestive tract
Esophagus −2
Stomach 0–20
Intestines 10–20
Middle ear <1
TABLE11.5Typical Pressures in Humans
Blood Pressure
Common arterial blood pressure measurements typically produce values of 120 mm Hg and 80 mm Hg,
respectively, for systolic and diastolic pressures. Both pressures have health implications. When systolic pressure is
chronically high, the risk of stroke and heart attack is increased. If, however, it is too low, fainting is a problem.
Systolic pressureincreases dramatically during exercise to increase blood flow and returns to normal afterward.
This change produces no ill effects and, in fact, may be beneficial to the tone of the circulatory system.Diastolic
pressurecan be an indicator of fluid balance. When low, it may indicate that a person is hemorrhaging internally and
needs a transfusion. Conversely, high diastolic pressure indicates a ballooning of the blood vessels, which may be
due to the transfusion of too much fluid into the circulatory system. High diastolic pressure is also an indication that
blood vessels are not dilating properly to pass blood through. This can seriously strain the heart in its attempt to
pump blood.
Blood leaves the heart at about 120 mm Hg but its pressure continues to decrease (to almost 0) as it goes from the
aorta to smaller arteries to small veins (seeFigure 11.34). The pressure differences in the circulation system are
caused by blood flow through the system as well as the position of the person. For a person standing up, the
pressure in the feet will be larger than at the heart due to the weight of the blood . If we assume that the
distance between the heart and the feet of a person in an upright position is 1.4 m, then the increase in pressure in
the feet relative to that in the heart (for a static column of blood) is given by
11.53
Increase in Pressure in the Feet of a Person
11.54
Standing a long time can lead to an accumulation of blood in the legs and swelling. This is the reason why soldiers
who are required to stand still for long periods of time have been known to faint. Elastic bandages around the calf
can help prevent this accumulation and can also help provide increased pressure to enable the veins to send blood
back up to the heart. For similar reasons, doctors recommend tight stockings for long-haul flights.
Blood pressure may also be measured in the major veins, the heart chambers, arteries to the brain, and the lungs.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 493
11.9 • Pressures in the Body 475
But these pressures are usually only monitored during surgery or for patients in intensive care since the
measurements are invasive. To obtain these pressure measurements, qualified health care workers thread thin
tubes, called catheters, into appropriate locations to transmit pressures to external measuring devices.
The heart consists of two pumps—the right side forcing blood through the lungs and the left causing blood to flow
through the rest of the body (Figure 11.34). Right-heart failure, for example, results in a rise in the pressure in the
vena cavae and a drop in pressure in the arteries to the lungs. Left-heart failure results in a rise in the pressure
entering the left side of the heart and a drop in aortal pressure. Implications of these and other pressures on flow in
the circulatory system will be discussed in more detail inFluid Dynamics and Its Biological and Medical
Applications.
Two Pumps of the Heart
The heart consists of two pumps—the right side forcing blood through the lungs and the left causing blood to
flow through the rest of the body.
FIGURE11.34Schematic of the circulatory system showing typical pressures. The two pumps in the heart increase pressure and that
pressure is reduced as the blood flows through the body. Long-term deviations from these pressures have medical implications discussed
in some detail in theFluid Dynamics and Its Biological and Medical Applications. Only aortal or arterial blood pressure can be measured
noninvasively.
Pressure in the Eye
The shape of the eye is maintained by fluid pressure, calledintraocular pressure, which is normally in the range of
12.0 to 24.0 mm Hg. When the circulation of fluid in the eye is blocked, it can lead to a buildup in pressure, a
condition calledglaucoma. The net pressure can become as great as 85.0 mm Hg, an abnormally large pressure
PAGE: 494
476 11 • Fluid Statics
that can permanently damage the optic nerve. To get an idea of the force involved, suppose the back of the eye has
an area of , and the net pressure is 85.0 mm Hg. Force is given by . To get in newtons, we convert
the area to ( ). Then we calculate as follows:
11.55
Eye Pressure
The shape of the eye is maintained by fluid pressure, called intraocular pressure. When the circulation of fluid in
the eye is blocked, it can lead to a buildup in pressure, a condition called glaucoma. The force is calculated as
11.56
This force is the weight of about a 680-g mass. A mass of 680 g resting on the eye (imagine 1.5 lb resting on your
eye) would be sufficient to cause it damage. (A normal force here would be the weight of about 120 g, less than one-
quarter of our initial value.)
People over 40 years of age are at greatest risk of developing glaucoma and should have their intraocular pressure
tested routinely. Most measurements involve exerting a force on the (anesthetized) eye over some area (a pressure)
and observing the eye’s response. A noncontact approach uses a puff of air and a measurement is made of the force
needed to indent the eye (Figure 11.35). If the intraocular pressure is high, the eye will deform less and rebound
more vigorously than normal. Excessive intraocular pressures can be detected reliably and sometimes controlled
effectively.
FIGURE11.35The intraocular eye pressure can be read with a tonometer. (credit: DevelopAll at the Wikipedia Project.)
EXAMPLE 11.13
Calculating Gauge Pressure and Depth: Damage to the Eardrum
Suppose a 3.00-N force can rupture an eardrum. (a) If the eardrum has an area of , calculate the maximum
tolerable gauge pressure on the eardrum in newtons per meter squared and convert it to millimeters of mercury. (b)
At what depth in freshwater would this person’s eardrum rupture, assuming the gauge pressure in the middle ear is
zero?
Strategy for (a)
The pressure can be found directly from its definition since we know the force and area. We are looking for the
gauge pressure.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 495
11.9 • Pressures in the Body 477
Solution for (a)
11.57
We now need to convert this to units of mm Hg:
11.58
Strategy for (b)
Here we will use the fact that the water pressure varies linearly with depth below the surface.
Solution for (b)
and therefore . Using the value above for , we have
11.59
Discussion
Similarly, increased pressure exerted upon the eardrum from the middle ear can arise when an infection causes a
fluid buildup.
Pressure Associated with the Lungs
The pressure inside the lungs increases and decreases with each breath. The pressure drops to below atmospheric
pressure (negative gauge pressure) when you inhale, causing air to flow into the lungs. It increases above
atmospheric pressure (positive gauge pressure) when you exhale, forcing air out.
Lung pressure is controlled by several mechanisms. Muscle action in the diaphragm and rib cage is necessary for
inhalation; this muscle action increases the volume of the lungs thereby reducing the pressure within themFigure
11.36. Surface tension in the alveoli creates a positive pressure opposing inhalation. (SeeCohesion and Adhesion in
Liquids: Surface Tension and Capillary Action.) You can exhale without muscle action by letting surface tension in
the alveoli create its own positive pressure. Muscle action can add to this positive pressure to produce forced
exhalation, such as when you blow up a balloon, blow out a candle, or cough.
The lungs, in fact, would collapse due to the surface tension in the alveoli, if they were not attached to the inside of
the chest wall by liquid adhesion. The gauge pressure in the liquid attaching the lungs to the inside of the chest wall
is thus negative, ranging from to during exhalation and inhalation, respectively. If air is allowed to
enter the chest cavity, it breaks the attachment, and one or both lungs may collapse. Suction is applied to the chest
cavity of surgery patients and trauma victims to reestablish negative pressure and inflate the lungs.
FIGURE11.36(a) During inhalation, muscles expand the chest, and the diaphragm moves downward, reducing pressure inside the lungs to
less than atmospheric (negative gauge pressure). Pressure between the lungs and chest wall is even lower to overcome the positive
pressure created by surface tension in the lungs. (b) During gentle exhalation, the muscles simply relax and surface tension in the alveoli
creates a positive pressure inside the lungs, forcing air out. Pressure between the chest wall and lungs remains negative to keep them
attached to the chest wall, but it is less negative than during inhalation.
PAGE: 496
478 11 • Fluid Statics
Other Pressures in the Body
Spinal Column and Skull
Normally, there is a 5- to12-mm Hg pressure in the fluid surrounding the brain and filling the spinal column. This
cerebrospinal fluid serves many purposes, one of which is to supply flotation to the brain. The buoyant force
supplied by the fluid nearly equals the weight of the brain, since their densities are nearly equal. If there is a loss of
fluid, the brain rests on the inside of the skull, causing severe headaches, constricted blood flow, and serious
damage. Spinal fluid pressure is measured by means of a needle inserted between vertebrae that transmits the
pressure to a suitable measuring device.
Bladder Pressure
This bodily pressure is one of which we are often aware. In fact, there is a relationship between our awareness of
this pressure and a subsequent increase in it. Bladder pressure climbs steadily from zero to about 25 mm Hg as the
bladder fills to its normal capacity of . This pressure triggers themicturition reflex, which stimulates the
feeling of needing to urinate. What is more, it also causes muscles around the bladder to contract, raising the
pressure to over 100 mm Hg, accentuating the sensation. Coughing, straining, tensing in cold weather, wearing tight
clothes, and experiencing simple nervous tension all can increase bladder pressure and trigger this reflex. So can
the weight of a pregnant woman’s fetus, especially if it is kicking vigorously or pushing down with its head! Bladder
pressure can be measured by a catheter or by inserting a needle through the bladder wall and transmitting the
pressure to an appropriate measuring device. One hazard of high bladder pressure (sometimes created by an
obstruction), is that such pressure can force urine back into the kidneys, causing potentially severe damage.
Pressures in the Skeletal System
These pressures are the largest in the body, due both to the high values of initial force, and the small areas to which
this force is applied, such as in the joints.. For example, when a person lifts an object improperly, a force of 5000 N
may be created between vertebrae in the spine, and this may be applied to an area as small as . The
pressure created is or about 50 atm! This pressure can
damage both the spinal discs (the cartilage between vertebrae), as well as the bony vertebrae themselves. Even
under normal circumstances, forces between vertebrae in the spine are large enough to create pressures of several
atmospheres. Most causes of excessive pressure in the skeletal system can be avoided by lifting properly and
avoiding extreme physical activity. (SeeForces and Torques in Muscles and Joints.)
There are many other interesting and medically significant pressures in the body. For example, pressure caused by
various muscle actions drives food and waste through the digestive system. Stomach pressure behaves much like
bladder pressure and is tied to the sensation of hunger. Pressure in the relaxed esophagus is normally negative
because pressure in the chest cavity is normally negative. Positive pressure in the stomach may thus force acid into
the esophagus, causing “heartburn.” Pressure in the middle ear can result in significant force on the eardrum if it
differs greatly from atmospheric pressure, such as while scuba diving. The decrease in external pressure is also
noticeable during plane flights (due to a decrease in the weight of air above relative to that at the Earth’s surface).
The Eustachian tubes connect the middle ear to the throat and allow us to equalize pressure in the middle ear to
avoid an imbalance of force on the eardrum.
Many pressures in the human body are associated with the flow of fluids. Fluid flow will be discussed in detail in the
Fluid Dynamics and Its Biological and Medical Applications.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 497
11 • Glossary 479
Glossary
absolute pressure the sum of gauge pressure and pressure
atmospheric pressure glaucoma condition caused by the buildup of fluid
adhesive forces the attractive forces between pressure in the eye
molecules of different types intraocular pressure fluid pressure in the eye
Archimedes’ principle the buoyant force on an micturition reflex stimulates the feeling of needing
object equals the weight of the fluid it displaces to urinate, triggered by bladder pressure
buoyant force the net upward force on any object in Pascal’s Principle a change in pressure applied to an
any fluid enclosed fluid is transmitted undiminished to all
capillary action the tendency of a fluid to be raised or portions of the fluid and to the walls of its container
lowered in a narrow tube pressure the force per unit area perpendicular to the
cohesive forces the attractive forces between force, over which the force acts
molecules of the same type pressure the weight of the fluid divided by the area
contact angle the angle between the tangent to the supporting it
liquid surface and the surface specific gravity the ratio of the density of an object to
density the mass per unit volume of a substance or a fluid (usually water)
object surface tension the cohesive forces between
diastolic pressure minimum arterial blood pressure; molecules which cause the surface of a liquid to
indicator for the fluid balance contract to the smallest possible surface area
diastolic pressure the minimum blood pressure in systolic pressure maximum arterial blood pressure;
the artery indicator for the blood flow
fluids liquids and gases; a fluid is a state of matter systolic pressure the maximum blood pressure in the
that yields to shearing forces artery
gauge pressure the pressure relative to atmospheric
Section Summary
11.1What Is a Fluid? the container):
• A fluid is a state of matter that yields to sideways
or shearing forces. Liquids and gases are both • Pressure due to the weight of a liquid is given by
fluids. Fluid statics is the physics of stationary
fluids. where is the pressure, is the height of the
liquid, is the density of the liquid, and is the
11.2Density
acceleration due to gravity.
• Density is the mass per unit volume of a substance
11.5Pascal’s Principle
or object. In equation form, density is defined as
• Pressure is force per unit area.
• A change in pressure applied to an enclosed fluid
• The SI unit of density is .
is transmitted undiminished to all portions of the
11.3Pressure fluid and to the walls of its container.
• A hydraulic system is an enclosed fluid system
• Pressure is the force per unit perpendicular area
used to exert forces.
over which the force is applied. In equation form,
pressure is defined as 11.6Gauge Pressure, Absolute Pressure,
and Pressure Measurement
• Gauge pressure is the pressure relative to
• The SI unit of pressure is pascal and
atmospheric pressure.
.
• Absolute pressure is the sum of gauge pressure
11.4Variation of Pressure with Depth in a and atmospheric pressure.
Fluid • Aneroid gauge measures pressure using a bellows-
and-spring arrangement connected to the pointer
• Pressure is the weight of the fluid divided by
of a calibrated scale.
the area supporting it (the area of the bottom of
• Open-tube manometers have U-shaped tubes and
PAGE: 498
480 11 • Conceptual Questions
one end is always open. It is used to measure • Attractive forces between molecules of different
pressure. types are called adhesive forces.
• A mercury barometer is a device that measures • Cohesive forces between molecules cause the
atmospheric pressure. surface of a liquid to contract to the smallest
possible surface area. This general effect is called
11.7Archimedes’ Principle
surface tension.
• Buoyant force is the net upward force on any • Capillary action is the tendency of a fluid to be
object in any fluid. If the buoyant force is greater raised or suppressed in a narrow tube, or capillary
than the object’s weight, the object will rise to the tube which is due to the relative strength of
surface and float. If the buoyant force is less than cohesive and adhesive forces.
the object’s weight, the object will sink. If the
11.9Pressures in the Body
buoyant force equals the object’s weight, the
object will remain suspended at that depth. The • Measuring blood pressure is among the most
buoyant force is always present whether the common of all medical examinations.
object floats, sinks, or is suspended in a fluid. • The pressures in various parts of the body can be
• Archimedes’ principle states that the buoyant measured and often provide valuable medical
force on an object equals the weight of the fluid it indicators.
displaces. • The shape of the eye is maintained by fluid
• Specific gravity is the ratio of the density of an pressure, called intraocular pressure.
object to a fluid (usually water). • When the circulation of fluid in the eye is blocked,
it can lead to a buildup in pressure, a condition
11.8Cohesion and Adhesion in Liquids:
called glaucoma.
Surface Tension and Capillary Action
• Some of the other pressures in the body are spinal
• Attractive forces between molecules of the same and skull pressures, bladder pressure, pressures in
type are called cohesive forces. the skeletal system.
Conceptual Questions
11.1What Is a Fluid? 7. Figure 11.37shows a glass of ice water filled to the
brim. Will the water overflow when the ice melts?
1. What physical characteristic distinguishes a fluid
Explain your answer.
from a solid?
2. Which of the following substances are fluids at
room temperature: air, mercury, water, glass?
3. Why are gases easier to compress than liquids and
solids?
4. How do gases differ from liquids?
11.2Density
5. Approximately how does the density of air vary with
altitude?
6. Give an example in which density is used to identify
the substance composing an object. Would FIGURE11.37
information in addition to average density be
needed to identify the substances in an object
11.3Pressure
composed of more than one material?
8. How is pressure related to the sharpness of a knife
and its ability to cut?
9. Why does a dull hypodermic needle hurt more than
a sharp one?
10. The outward force on one end of an air tank was
calculated inExample 11.2. How is this force
balanced? (The tank does not accelerate, so the
force must be balanced.)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 499
11 • Conceptual Questions 481
11. Why is force exerted by static fluids always 20. Why is it difficult to swim under water in the Great
perpendicular to a surface? Salt Lake?
12. In a remote location near the North Pole, an 21. Is there a net force on a dam due to atmospheric
iceberg floats in a lake. Next to the lake (assume it pressure? Explain your answer.
is not frozen) sits a comparably sized glacier 22. Does atmospheric pressure add to the gas
sitting on land. If both chunks of ice should melt pressure in a rigid tank? In a toy balloon? When, in
due to rising global temperatures (and the melted general, does atmospheric pressurenotaffect the
ice all goes into the lake), which ice chunk would total pressure in a fluid?
give the greatest increase in the level of the lake 23. You can break a strong wine bottle by pounding a
water, if any? cork into it with your fist, but the cork must press
13. How do jogging on soft ground and wearing directly against the liquid filling the bottle—there
padded shoes reduce the pressures to which the can be no air between the cork and liquid. Explain
feet and legs are subjected? why the bottle breaks, and why it will not if there
14. Toe dancing (as in ballet) is much harder on toes is air between the cork and liquid.
than normal dancing or walking. Explain in terms
of pressure. 11.5Pascal’s Principle
15. How do you convert pressure units like millimeters
24. Suppose the pedal cylinder in a hydraulic system
of mercury, centimeters of water, and inches of
is at a greater height than the wheel cylinder.
mercury into units like newtons per meter squared
Explain how this will affect the force produced at
without resorting to a table of pressure conversion
the wheel cylinder.
factors?
11.6Gauge Pressure, Absolute Pressure,
11.4Variation of Pressure with Depth in a
and Pressure Measurement
Fluid
25. Explain why the fluid reaches equal levels on
16. Atmospheric pressure exerts a large force (equal
either side of a manometer if both sides are open
to the weight of the atmosphere above your
to the atmosphere, even if the tubes are of
body—about 10 tons) on the top of your body
different diameters.
when you are lying on the beach sunbathing. Why
26. Figure 11.15shows how a common measurement
are you able to get up?
of arterial blood pressure is made. Is there any
17. Why does atmospheric pressure decrease more
effect on the measured pressure if the manometer
rapidly than linearly with altitude?
is lowered? What is the effect of raising the arm
18. What are two reasons why mercury rather than
above the shoulder? What is the effect of placing
water is used in barometers?
the cuff on the upper leg with the person
19. Figure 11.38shows how sandbags placed around a
standing? Explain your answers in terms of
leak outside a river levee can effectively stop the flow
pressure created by the weight of a fluid.
of water under the levee. Explain how the small
27. Considering the magnitude of typical arterial blood
amount of water inside the column formed by the
pressures, why are mercury rather than water
sandbags is able to balance the much larger body of
manometers used for these measurements?
water behind the levee.
11.7Archimedes’ Principle
28. More force is required to pull the plug in a full
bathtub than when it is empty. Does this
contradict Archimedes’ principle? Explain your
answer.
29. Do fluids exert buoyant forces in a “weightless”
environment, such as in the space shuttle? Explain
your answer.
30. Will the same ship float higher in salt water than in
freshwater? Explain your answer.
FIGURE11.38Because the river level is very high, it has started to
leak under the levee. Sandbags are placed around the leak, and
the water held by them rises until it is the same level as the river,
at which point the water there stops rising.
PAGE: 500
482 11 • Problems & Exercises
31. Marbles dropped into a partially filled bathtub sink 35. Birds such as ducks, geese, and swans have
to the bottom. Part of their weight is supported by greater densities than water, yet they are able to
buoyant force, yet the downward force on the sit on its surface. Explain this ability, noting that
bottom of the tub increases by exactly the weight water does not wet their feathers and that they
of the marbles. Explain why. cannot sit on soapy water.
36. Water beads up on an oily sunbather, but not on
11.8Cohesion and Adhesion in Liquids: her neighbor, whose skin is not oiled. Explain in
Surface Tension and Capillary Action terms of cohesive and adhesive forces.
37. Could capillary action be used to move fluids in a
32. The density of oil is less than that of water, yet a
“weightless” environment, such as in an orbiting
loaded oil tanker sits lower in the water than an
space probe?
empty one. Why?
38. What effect does capillary action have on the
33. Is surface tension due to cohesive or adhesive
reading of a manometer with uniform diameter?
forces, or both?
Explain your answer.
34. Is capillary action due to cohesive or adhesive
39. Pressure between the inside chest wall and the
forces, or both?
outside of the lungs normally remains negative.
Explain how pressure inside the lungs can become
positive (to cause exhalation) without muscle
action.
Problems & Exercises
11.2Density 8. A 2.50-kg steel gasoline can holds 20.0 L of
gasoline when full. What is the average density of
1. Gold is sold by the troy ounce (31.103 g). What is
the full gas can, taking into account the volume
the volume of 1 troy ounce of pure gold?
occupied by steel as well as by gasoline?
2. Mercury is commonly supplied in flasks containing
9. What is the density of 18.0-karat gold that is a
34.5 kg (about 76 lb). What is the volume in liters of
mixture of 18 parts gold, 5 parts silver, and 1 part
this much mercury?
copper? (These values are parts by mass, not
3. (a) What is the mass of a deep breath of air having a
volume.) Assume that this is a simple mixture
volume of 2.00 L? (b) Discuss the effect taking such
having an average density equal to the weighted
a breath has on your body’s volume and density.
densities of its constituents.
4. A straightforward method of finding the density of
10. There is relatively little empty space between
an object is to measure its mass and then measure
atoms in solids and liquids, so that the average
its volume by submerging it in a graduated cylinder.
density of an atom is about the same as matter on
What is the density of a 240-g rock that displaces
a macroscopic scale—approximately .
of water? (Note that the accuracy and
The nucleus of an atom has a radius about
practical applications of this technique are more
that of the atom and contains nearly all the mass
limited than a variety of others that are based on
of the entire atom. (a) What is the approximate
Archimedes’ principle.)
density of a nucleus? (b) One remnant of a
5. Suppose you have a coffee mug with a circular
supernova, called a neutron star, can have the
cross section and vertical sides (uniform radius).
density of a nucleus. What would be the radius of
What is its inside radius if it holds 375 g of coffee
a neutron star with a mass 10 times that of our
when filled to a depth of 7.50 cm? Assume coffee
Sun (the radius of the Sun is )?
has the same density as water.
6. (a) A rectangular gasoline tank can hold 50.0 kg of
gasoline when full. What is the depth of the tank if it
is 0.500-m wide by 0.900-m long? (b) Discuss
whether this gas tank has a reasonable volume for a
passenger car.
7. A trash compactor can reduce the volume of its
contents to 0.350 their original value. Neglecting
the mass of air expelled, by what factor is the
density of the rubbish increased?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 501
11 • Problems & Exercises 483
11.3Pressure 21. Calculate the average pressure exerted on the
palm of a shot-putter’s hand by the shot if the
11. As a woman walks, her entire weight is
area of contact is and he exerts a force
momentarily placed on one heel of her high-
of 800 N on it. Express the pressure in and
heeled shoes. Calculate the pressure exerted on
compare it with the pressures
the floor by the heel if it has an area of
sometimes encountered in the skeletal system.
and the woman’s mass is 55.0 kg. Express the
22. The left side of the heart creates a pressure of 120
pressure in Pa. (In the early days of commercial
mm Hg by exerting a force directly on the blood
flight, women were not allowed to wear high-
over an effective area of What force
heeled shoes because aircraft floors were too thin
does it exert to accomplish this?
to withstand such large pressures.)
23. Show that the total force on a rectangular dam
12. The pressure exerted by a phonograph needle on
due to the water behind it increases with the
a record is surprisingly large. If the equivalent of
squareof the water depth. In particular, show that
1.00 g is supported by a needle, the tip of which is
this force is given by , where is
a circle 0.200 mm in radius, what pressure is
the density of water, is its depth at the dam, and
exerted on the record in ?
is the length of the dam. You may assume the
13. Nail tips exert tremendous pressures when they
face of the dam is vertical. (Hint: Calculate the
are hit by hammers because they exert a large
average pressure exerted and multiply this by the
force over a small area. What force must be
area in contact with the water. (SeeFigure 11.39.)
exerted on a nail with a circular tip of 1.00 mm
diameter to create a pressure of
(This high pressure is possible
because the hammer striking the nail is brought to
rest in such a short distance.)
11.4Variation of Pressure with Depth in a
Fluid
14. What depth of mercury creates a pressure of 1.00
atm?
15. The greatest ocean depths on the Earth are found
in the Marianas Trench near the Philippines.
Calculate the pressure due to the ocean at the FIGURE11.39
bottom of this trench, given its depth is 11.0 km
and assuming the density of seawater is constant 11.5Pascal’s Principle
all the way down.
16. Verify that the SI unit of is . 24. How much pressure is transmitted in the hydraulic
17. Water towers store water above the level of system considered inExample 11.6? Express your
consumers for times of heavy use, eliminating the answer in pascals and in atmospheres.
need for high-speed pumps. How high above a 25. What force must be exerted on the pedal cylinder
user must the water level be to create a gauge of a hydraulic lift to support the weight of a
2000-kg car (a large car) resting on the wheel
pressure of ?
cylinder? The pedal cylinder has a 2.00-cm
18. The aqueous humor in a person’s eye is exerting a
diameter and the wheel has a 24.0-cm diameter.
force of 0.300 N on the area of the
26. A crass host pours the remnants of several bottles
cornea. (a) What pressure is this in mm Hg? (b) Is
of wine into a jug after a party. He then inserts a
this value within the normal range for pressures in
cork with a 2.00-cm diameter into the bottle,
the eye?
placing it in direct contact with the wine. He is
19. How much force is exerted on one side of an 8.50
amazed when he pounds the cork into place and
cm by 11.0 cm sheet of paper by the atmosphere?
the bottom of the jug (with a 14.0-cm diameter)
How can the paper withstand such a force?
breaks away. Calculate the extra force exerted
20. What pressure is exerted on the bottom of a
against the bottom if he pounded the cork with a
0.500-m-wide by 0.900-m-long gas tank that can
120-N force.
hold 50.0 kg of gasoline by the weight of the
gasoline in it when it is full?
PAGE: 502
484 11 • Problems & Exercises
27. A certain hydraulic system is designed to exert a 33. Suppose you measure a standing person’s blood
force 100 times as large as the one put into it. (a) pressure by placing the cuff on his leg 0.500 m
What must be the ratio of the area of the wheel below the heart. Calculate the pressure you would
cylinder to the area of the pedal cylinder? (b) What observe (in units of mm Hg) if the pressure at the
must be the ratio of their diameters? (c) By what heart were 120 over 80 mm Hg. Assume that
factor is the distance through which the output there is no loss of pressure due to resistance in
force moves reduced relative to the distance the circulatory system (a reasonable assumption,
through which the input force moves? Assume no since major arteries are large).
losses to friction. 34. A submarine is stranded on the bottom of the
28. (a) Verify that work input equals work output for a ocean with its hatch 25.0 m below the surface.
hydraulic system assuming no losses to friction. Calculate the force needed to open the hatch from
Do this by showing that the distance the output the inside, given it is circular and 0.450 m in
force moves is reduced by the same factor that diameter. Air pressure inside the submarine is
the output force is increased. Assume the volume 1.00 atm.
of the fluid is constant. (b) What effect would 35. Assuming bicycle tires are perfectly flexible and
friction within the fluid and between components support the weight of bicycle and rider by
in the system have on the output force? How pressure alone, calculate the total area of the tires
would this depend on whether or not the fluid is in contact with the ground. The bicycle plus rider
moving? has a mass of 80.0 kg, and the gauge pressure in
the tires is .
11.6Gauge Pressure, Absolute Pressure,
and Pressure Measurement 11.7Archimedes’ Principle
29. Find the gauge and absolute pressures in the 36. What fraction of ice is submerged when it floats in
balloon and peanut jar shown inFigure 11.14, freshwater, given the density of water at 0°C is
assuming the manometer connected to the very close to ?
balloon uses water whereas the manometer 37. Logs sometimes float vertically in a lake because
connected to the jar contains mercury. Express in one end has become water-logged and denser
units of centimeters of water for the balloon and than the other. What is the average density of a
millimeters of mercury for the jar, taking uniform-diameter log that floats with of its
for each. length above water?
30. (a) Convert normal blood pressure readings of 120 38. Find the density of a fluid in which a hydrometer
over 80 mm Hg to newtons per meter squared having a density of floats with
using the relationship for pressure due to the of its volume submerged.
weight of a fluid rather than a 39. If your body has a density of , what
conversion factor. (b) Discuss why blood pressures fraction of you will be submerged when floating
for an infant could be smaller than those for an gently in: (a) freshwater? (b) salt water, which has
adult. Specifically, consider the smaller height to a density of ?
which blood must be pumped. 40. Bird bones have air pockets in them to reduce
31. How tall must a water-filled manometer be to their weight—this also gives them an average
measure blood pressures as high as 300 mm Hg? density significantly less than that of the bones of
32. Pressure cookers have been around for more than other animals. Suppose an ornithologist weighs a
300 years, although their use has strongly bird bone in air and in water and finds its mass is
declined in recent years (early models had a nasty and its apparent mass when submerged is
habit of exploding). How much force must the (the bone is watertight). (a) What mass of
latches holding the lid onto a pressure cooker be water is displaced? (b) What is the volume of the
able to withstand if the circular lid is in bone? (c) What is its average density?
diameter and the gauge pressure inside is 300 41. A rock with a mass of 540 g in air is found to have
atm? Neglect the weight of the lid. an apparent mass of 342 g when submerged in
water. (a) What mass of water is displaced? (b)
What is the volume of the rock? (c) What is its
average density? Is this consistent with the value
for granite?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 503
11 • Problems & Exercises 485
42. Archimedes’ principle can be used to calculate the 50. Scurrilous con artists have been known to
density of a fluid as well as that of a solid. represent gold-plated tungsten ingots as pure
Suppose a chunk of iron with a mass of 390.0 g in gold and sell them at prices much below gold
air is found to have an apparent mass of 350.5 g value but deservedly far above the cost of
when completely submerged in an unknown tungsten. With what accuracy must you be able to
liquid. (a) What mass of fluid does the iron measure the mass of such an ingot in and out of
displace? (b) What is the volume of iron, using its water to tell that it is almost pure tungsten rather
density as given inTable 11.1(c) Calculate the than pure gold?
fluid’s density and identify it. 51. A twin-sized air mattress used for camping has
43. In an immersion measurement of a woman’s dimensions of 100 cm by 200 cm by 15 cm when
density, she is found to have a mass of 62.0 kg in blown up. The weight of the mattress is 2 kg. How
air and an apparent mass of 0.0850 kg when heavy a person could the air mattress hold if it is
completely submerged with lungs empty. (a) What placed in freshwater?
mass of water does she displace? (b) What is her 52. Referring toFigure 11.19, prove that the buoyant
volume? (c) Calculate her density. (d) If her lung force on the cylinder is equal to the weight of the
capacity is 1.75 L, is she able to float without fluid displaced (Archimedes’ principle). You may
treading water with her lungs filled with air? assume that the buoyant force is and
44. Some fish have a density slightly less than that of that the ends of the cylinder have equal areas .
water and must exert a force (swim) to stay Note that the volume of the cylinder (and that of
submerged. What force must an 85.0-kg grouper the fluid it displaces) equals .
exert to stay submerged in salt water if its body 53. (a) A 75.0-kg man floats in freshwater with
density is ? of his volume above water when his lungs are
45. (a) Calculate the buoyant force on a 2.00-L helium empty, and of his volume above water
balloon. (b) Given the mass of the rubber in the when his lungs are full. Calculate the volume of air
balloon is 1.50 g, what is the net vertical force on he inhales—called his lung capacity—in liters. (b)
the balloon if it is let go? You can neglect the Does this lung volume seem reasonable?
volume of the rubber.
46. (a) What is the density of a woman who floats in 11.8Cohesion and Adhesion in Liquids:
freshwater with of her volume above the Surface Tension and Capillary Action
surface? This could be measured by placing her in
54. What is the pressure inside an alveolus having a
a tank with marks on the side to measure how
radius of if the surface tension of
much water she displaces when floating and when
the fluid-lined wall is the same as for soapy water?
held under water (briefly). (b) What percent of her
You may assume the pressure is the same as that
volume is above the surface when she floats in
created by a spherical bubble.
seawater?
55. (a) The pressure inside an alveolus with a
47. A certain man has a mass of 80 kg and a density of
-m radius is , due to its
(excluding the air in his lungs). (a)
fluid-lined walls. Assuming the alveolus acts like a
Calculate his volume. (b) Find the buoyant force
spherical bubble, what is the surface tension of
air exerts on him. (c) What is the ratio of the
the fluid? (b) Identify the likely fluid. (You may
buoyant force to his weight?
need to extrapolate between values inTable
48. A simple compass can be made by placing a small
11.3.)
bar magnet on a cork floating in water. (a) What
56. What is the gauge pressure in millimeters of
fraction of a plain cork will be submerged when
mercury inside a soap bubble 0.100 m in
floating in water? (b) If the cork has a mass of
diameter?
10.0 g and a 20.0-g magnet is placed on it, what
57. Calculate the force on the slide wire inFigure
fraction of the cork will be submerged? (c) Will the
11.26if it is 3.50 cm long and the fluid is ethyl
bar magnet and cork float in ethyl alcohol?
alcohol.
49. What fraction of an iron anchor’s weight will be
supported by buoyant force when submerged in
saltwater?
PAGE: 504
486 11 • Problems & Exercises
58. Figure 11.32(a) shows the effect of tube radius on 11.9Pressures in the Body
the height to which capillary action can raise a
68. During forced exhalation, such as when blowing
fluid. (a) Calculate the height for water in a glass
up a balloon, the diaphragm and chest muscles
tube with a radius of 0.900 cm—a rather large
create a pressure of 60.0 mm Hg between the
tube like the one on the left. (b) What is the radius
lungs and chest wall. What force in newtons does
of the glass tube on the right if it raises water to
this pressure create on the surface area
4.00 cm?
of the diaphragm?
59. We stated inExample 11.12that a xylem tube is
69. You can chew through very tough objects with
of radius . Verify that such a tube
your incisors because they exert a large force on
raises sap less than a meter by finding for it,
the small area of a pointed tooth. What pressure in
making the same assumptions that sap’s density
pascals can you create by exerting a force of
is , its contact angle is zero, and its
with your tooth on an area of ?
surface tension is the same as that of water at
70. One way to force air into an unconscious person’s
.
lungs is to squeeze on a balloon appropriately
60. What fluid is in the device shown inFigure 11.26if
connected to the subject. What force must you
the force is and the length of the
exert on the balloon with your hands to create a
wire is 2.50 cm? Calculate the surface tension
gauge pressure of 4.00 cm water, assuming you
and find a likely match fromTable 11.3.
squeeze on an effective area of ?
61. If the gauge pressure inside a rubber balloon with
71. Heroes in movies hide beneath water and breathe
a 10.0-cm radius is 1.50 cm of water, what is the
through a hollow reed (villains never catch on to
effective surface tension of the balloon?
this trick). In practice, you cannot inhale in this
62. Calculate the gauge pressures inside 2.00-cm-
manner if your lungs are more than 60.0 cm below
radius bubbles of water, alcohol, and soapy water.
the surface. What is the maximum negative gauge
Which liquid forms the most stable bubbles,
pressure you can create in your lungs on dry land,
neglecting any effects of evaporation?
assuming you can achieve water
63. Suppose water is raised by capillary action to a
pressure with your lungs 60.0 cm below the
height of 5.00 cm in a glass tube. (a) To what
surface?
height will it be raised in a paraffin tube of the
72. Gauge pressure in the fluid surrounding an infant’s
same radius? (b) In a silver tube of the same
brain may rise as high as 85.0 mm Hg (5 to 12 mm
radius?
Hg is normal), creating an outward force large
64. Calculate the contact angle for olive oil if
enough to make the skull grow abnormally large.
capillary action raises it to a height of 7.07 cm in a
(a) Calculate this outward force in newtons on
glass tube with a radius of 0.100 mm. Is this value
each side of an infant’s skull if the effective area of
consistent with that for most organic liquids?
each side is . (b) What is the net force
65. When two soap bubbles touch, the larger is
acting on the skull?
inflated by the smaller until they form a single
73. A full-term fetus typically has a mass of 3.50 kg.
bubble. (a) What is the gauge pressure inside a
(a) What pressure does the weight of such a fetus
soap bubble with a 1.50-cm radius? (b) Inside a
create if it rests on the mother’s bladder,
4.00-cm-radius soap bubble? (c) Inside the single
supported on an area of ? (b) Convert
bubble they form if no air is lost when they touch?
this pressure to millimeters of mercury and
66. Calculate the ratio of the heights to which water
determine if it alone is great enough to trigger the
and mercury are raised by capillary action in the
micturition reflex (it will add to any pressure
same glass tube.
already existing in the bladder).
67. What is the ratio of heights to which ethyl alcohol
74. If the pressure in the esophagus is
and water are raised by capillary action in the
while that in the stomach is , to
same glass tube?
what height could stomach fluid rise in the
esophagus, assuming a density of 1.10 g/mL?
(This movement will not occur if the muscle
closing the lower end of the esophagus is working
properly.)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 505
11 • Problems & Exercises 487
75. Pressure in the spinal fluid is measured as shown 80. A negative pressure of 25.0 atm can sometimes
inFigure 11.40. If the pressure in the spinal fluid be achieved with the device inFigure 11.41before
is 10.0 mm Hg: (a) What is the reading of the the water separates. (a) To what height could such
water manometer in cm water? (b) What is the a negative gauge pressure raise water? (b) How
reading if the person sits up, placing the top of the much would a steel wire of the same diameter and
fluid 60 cm above the tap? The fluid density is length as this capillary stretch if suspended from
1.05 g/mL. above?
FIGURE11.40A water manometer used to measure
pressure in the spinal fluid. The height of the fluid in the
manometer is measured relative to the spinal column, and
the manometer is open to the atmosphere. The measured
pressure will be considerably greater if the person sits up.
76. Calculate the maximum force in newtons exerted
by the blood on an aneurysm, or ballooning, in a
major artery, given the maximum blood pressure
for this person is 150 mm Hg and the effective
area of the aneurysm is . Note that this
force is great enough to cause further
enlargement and subsequently greater force on
the ever-thinner vessel wall.
77. During heavy lifting, a disk between spinal
vertebrae is subjected to a 5000-N compressional
force. (a) What pressure is created, assuming that FIGURE11.41(a) When the piston is raised, it stretches the
liquid slightly, putting it under tension and creating a
the disk has a uniform circular cross section 2.00 negative absolute pressure (b) The liquid
cm in radius? (b) What deformation is produced if eventually separates, giving an experimental limit to
negative pressure in this liquid.
the disk is 0.800 cm thick and has a Young’s
modulus of ? 81. Suppose you hit a steel nail with a 0.500-kg
78. When a person sits erect, increasing the vertical hammer, initially moving at and brought
position of their brain by 36.0 cm, the heart must to rest in 2.80 mm. (a) What average force is
continue to pump blood to the brain at the same exerted on the nail? (b) How much is the nail
rate. (a) What is the gain in gravitational potential compressed if it is 2.50 mm in diameter and
energy for 100 mL of blood raised 36.0 cm? (b) 6.00-cm long? (c) What pressure is created on the
What is the drop in pressure, neglecting any losses 1.00-mm-diameter tip of the nail?
due to friction? (c) Discuss how the gain in 82. Calculate the pressure due to the ocean at the
gravitational potential energy and the decrease in bottom of the Marianas Trench near the
pressure are related. Philippines, given its depth is and
79. (a) How high will water rise in a glass capillary assuming the density of sea water is constant all
tube with a 0.500-mm radius? (b) How much the way down. (b) Calculate the percent decrease
gravitational potential energy does the water gain? in volume of sea water due to such a pressure,
(c) Discuss possible sources of this energy. assuming its bulk modulus is the same as water
and is constant. (c) What would be the percent
increase in its density? Is the assumption of
constant density valid? Will the actual pressure be
greater or smaller than that calculated under this
assumption?
PAGE: 506
488 11 • Problems & Exercises
83. The hydraulic system of a backhoe is used to lift a 84. Some miners wish to remove water from a mine
load as shown inFigure 11.42. (a) Calculate the shaft. A pipe is lowered to the water 90 m below,
force the secondary cylinder must exert to and a negative pressure is applied to raise the
support the 400-kg load and the 150-kg brace and water. (a) Calculate the pressure needed to raise
shovel. (b) What is the pressure in the hydraulic the water. (b) What is unreasonable about this
fluid if the secondary cylinder is 2.50 cm in pressure? (c) What is unreasonable about the
diameter? (c) What force would you have to exert premise?
on a lever with a mechanical advantage of 5.00 85. You are pumping up a bicycle tire with a hand
acting on a primary cylinder 0.800 cm in diameter pump, the piston of which has a 2.00-cm radius.
to create this pressure? (a) What force in newtons must you exert to create
a pressure of (b) What is
unreasonable about this (a) result? (c) Which
premises are unreasonable or inconsistent?
86. Consider a group of people trying to stay afloat
after their boat strikes a log in a lake. Construct a
problem in which you calculate the number of
people that can cling to the log and keep their
heads out of the water. Among the variables to be
considered are the size and density of the log, and
what is needed to keep a person’s head and arms
above water without swimming or treading water.
87. The alveoli in emphysema victims are damaged
and effectively form larger sacs. Construct a
problem in which you calculate the loss of
pressure due to surface tension in the alveoli
because of their larger average diameters. (Part of
the lung’s ability to expel air results from pressure
created by surface tension in the alveoli.) Among
the things to consider are the normal surface
tension of the fluid lining the alveoli, the average
FIGURE11.42Hydraulic and mechanical lever systems are
alveolar radius in normal individuals and its
used in heavy machinery such as this back hoe.
average in emphysema sufferers.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 507
CHAPTER 12
Fluid Dynamics and Its Biological and Medical
Applications
FIGURE12.1Many fluids are flowing in this scene. Water from the hose and smoke from the fire are visible flows. Less visible are the flow
of air and the flow of fluids on the ground and within the people fighting the fire. (credit: Andrew Magill, Flickr)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
12.1Flow Rate and Its Relation to Velocity
12.2Bernoulli’s Equation
12.3The Most General Applications of Bernoulli’s Equation
12.4Viscosity and Laminar Flow; Poiseuille’s Law
12.5The Onset of Turbulence
12.6Motion of an Object in a Viscous Fluid
12.7Molecular Transport Phenomena: Diffusion, Osmosis, and Related Processes
INTRODUCTION TO FLUID DYNAMICS AND ITS BIOLOGICAL AND MEDICAL APPLICATIONS We have dealt with
many situations in which fluids are static. But by their very definition, fluids flow. Examples come easily—a column
of smoke rises from a camp fire, water streams from a fire hose, blood courses through your veins. Why does rising
smoke curl and twist? How does a nozzle increase the speed of water emerging from a hose? How does the body
regulate blood flow? The physics of fluids in motion—fluid dynamics—allows us to answer these and many other
questions.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/12-introduction-to-fluid-dynamics-
and-its-biological-and-medical-applications)
PAGE: 508
490 12 • Fluid Dynamics and Its Biological and Medical Applications
12.1 Flow Rate and Its Relation to Velocity
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Calculate flow rate.
• Define units of volume.
• Describe incompressible fluids.
• Explain the consequences of the equation of continuity.
Flow rate is defined to be the volume of fluid passing by some location through an area during a period of time, as
seen inFigure 12.2. In symbols, this can be written as
12.1
where is the volume and is the elapsed time.
The SI unit for flow rate is , but a number of other units for are in common use. For example, the heart of a
resting adult pumps blood at a rate of 5.00 liters per minute (L/min). Note that aliter(L) is 1/1000 of a cubic meter
or 1000 cubic centimeters ( or ). In this text we shall use whatever metric units are most
convenient for a given situation.
FIGURE12.2Flow rate is the volume of fluid per unit time flowing past a point through the area . Here the shaded cylinder of fluid flows
past point in a uniform pipe in time . The volume of the cylinder is and the average velocity is so that the flow rate is
.
EXAMPLE 12.1
Calculating Volume from Flow Rate: The Heart Pumps a Lot of Blood in a Lifetime
How many cubic meters of blood does the heart pump in a 75-year lifetime, assuming the average flow rate is 5.00
L/min?
Strategy
Time and flow rate are given, and so the volume can be calculated from the definition of flow rate.
Solution
Solving for volume gives
12.2
Substituting known values yields
12.3
Discussion
This amount is about 200,000 tons of blood. For comparison, this value is equivalent to about 200 times the volume
of water contained in a 6-lane 50-m lap pool.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 509
12.1 • Flow Rate and Its Relation to Velocity 491
Flow rate and velocity are related, but quite different, physical quantities. To make the distinction clear, think about
the flow rate of a river. The greater the velocity of the water, the greater the flow rate of the river. But flow rate also
depends on the size of the river. A rapid mountain stream carries far less water than the Amazon River in Brazil, for
example. The precise relationship between flow rate and velocity is
12.4
where is the cross-sectional area and is the average velocity. This equation seems logical enough. The
relationship tells us that flow rate is directly proportional to both the magnitude of the average velocity (hereafter
referred to as the speed) and the size of a river, pipe, or other conduit. The larger the conduit, the greater its cross-
sectional area.Figure 12.2illustrates how this relationship is obtained. The shaded cylinder has a volume
12.5
which flows past the point in a time . Dividing both sides of this relationship by gives
12.6
We note that and the average speed is . Thus the equation becomes .
Figure 12.3shows an incompressible fluid flowing along a pipe of decreasing radius. Because the fluid is
incompressible, the same amount of fluid must flow past any point in the tube in a given time to ensure continuity of
flow. In this case, because the cross-sectional area of the pipe decreases, the velocity must necessarily increase.
This logic can be extended to say that the flow rate must be the same at all points along the pipe. In particular, for
points 1 and 2,
12.7
This is called the equation of continuity and is valid for any incompressible fluid. The consequences of the equation
of continuity can be observed when water flows from a hose into a narrow spray nozzle: it emerges with a large
speed—that is the purpose of the nozzle. Conversely, when a river empties into one end of a reservoir, the water
slows considerably, perhaps picking up speed again when it leaves the other end of the reservoir. In other words,
speed increases when cross-sectional area decreases, and speed decreases when cross-sectional area increases.
FIGURE12.3When a tube narrows, the same volume occupies a greater length. For the same volume to pass points 1 and 2 in a given time,
the speed must be greater at point 2. The process is exactly reversible. If the fluid flows in the opposite direction, its speed will decrease
when the tube widens. (Note that the relative volumes of the two cylinders and the corresponding velocity vector arrows are not drawn to
scale.)
Since liquids are essentially incompressible, the equation of continuity is valid for all liquids. However, gases are
compressible, and so the equation must be applied with caution to gases if they are subjected to compression or
expansion.
EXAMPLE 12.2
Calculating Fluid Speed: Speed Increases When a Tube Narrows
A nozzle with a radius of 0.250 cm is attached to a garden hose with a radius of 0.900 cm. The flow rate through
hose and nozzle is 0.500 L/s. Calculate the speed of the water (a) in the hose and (b) in the nozzle.
PAGE: 510
492 12 • Fluid Dynamics and Its Biological and Medical Applications
Strategy
We can use the relationship between flow rate and speed to find both velocities. We will use the subscript 1 for the
hose and 2 for the nozzle.
Solution for (a)
First, we solve for and note that the cross-sectional area is , yielding
12.8
Substituting known values and making appropriate unit conversions yields
12.9
Solution for (b)
We could repeat this calculation to find the speed in the nozzle , but we will use the equation of continuity to give
a somewhat different insight. Using the equation which states
12.10
solving for and substituting for the cross-sectional area yields
12.11
Substituting known values,
12.12
Discussion
A speed of 1.96 m/s is about right for water emerging from a nozzleless hose. The nozzle produces a considerably
faster stream merely by constricting the flow to a narrower tube.
The solution to the last part of the example shows that speed is inversely proportional to thesquareof the radius of
the tube, making for large effects when radius varies. We can blow out a candle at quite a distance, for example, by
pursing our lips, whereas blowing on a candle with our mouth wide open is quite ineffective.
In many situations, including in the cardiovascular system, branching of the flow occurs. The blood is pumped from
the heart into arteries that subdivide into smaller arteries (arterioles) which branch into very fine vessels called
capillaries. In this situation, continuity of flow is maintained but it is thesumof the flow rates in each of the
branches in any portion along the tube that is maintained. The equation of continuity in a more general form
becomes
12.13
where and are the number of branches in each of the sections along the tube.
EXAMPLE 12.3
Calculating Flow Speed and Vessel Diameter: Branching in the Cardiovascular System
The aorta is the principal blood vessel through which blood leaves the heart in order to circulate around the body. (a)
Calculate the average speed of the blood in the aorta if the flow rate is 5.0 L/min. The aorta has a radius of 10 mm.
(b) Blood also flows through smaller blood vessels known as capillaries. When the rate of blood flow in the aorta is
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 511
12.2 • Bernoulli’s Equation 493
5.0 L/min, the speed of blood in the capillaries is about 0.33 mm/s. Given that the average diameter of a capillary is
, calculate the number of capillaries in the blood circulatory system.
Strategy
We can use to calculate the speed of flow in the aorta and then use the general form of the equation of
continuity to calculate the number of capillaries as all of the other variables are known.
Solution for (a)
The flow rate is given by or for a cylindrical vessel.
Substituting the known values (converted to units of meters and seconds) gives
12.14
Solution for (b)
Using , assigning the subscript 1 to the aorta and 2 to the capillaries, and solving for (the
number of capillaries) gives . Converting all quantities to units of meters and seconds and substituting
into the equation above gives
12.15
Discussion
Note that the speed of flow in the capillaries is considerably reduced relative to the speed in the aorta due to the
significant increase in the total cross-sectional area at the capillaries. This low speed is to allow sufficient time for
effective exchange to occur although it is equally important for the flow not to become stationary in order to avoid
the possibility of clotting. Does this large number of capillaries in the body seem reasonable? In active muscle, one
finds about 200 capillaries per , or about per 1 kg of muscle. For 20 kg of muscle, this amounts to
about capillaries.
12.2 Bernoulli’s Equation
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the terms in Bernoulli’s equation.
• Explain how Bernoulli’s equation is related to conservation of energy.
• Explain how to derive Bernoulli’s principle from Bernoulli’s equation.
• Calculate with Bernoulli’s principle.
• List some applications of Bernoulli’s principle.
When a fluid flows into a narrower channel, its speed increases. That means its kinetic energy also increases. Where
does that change in kinetic energy come from? The increased kinetic energy comes from the net work done on the
fluid to push it into the channel and the work done on the fluid by the gravitational force, if the fluid changes vertical
position. Recall the work-energy theorem,
12.16
There is a pressure difference when the channel narrows. This pressure difference results in a net force on the fluid:
recall that pressure times area equals force. The net work done increases the fluid’s kinetic energy. As a result, the
pressure will drop in a rapidly-moving fluid, whether or not the fluid is confined to a tube.
There are a number of common examples of pressure dropping in rapidly-moving fluids. Shower curtains have a
PAGE: 512
494 12 • Fluid Dynamics and Its Biological and Medical Applications
disagreeable habit of bulging into the shower stall when the shower is on. The high-velocity stream of water and air
creates a region of lower pressure inside the shower, and standard atmospheric pressure on the other side. The
pressure difference results in a net force inward pushing the curtain in. You may also have noticed that when
passing a truck on the highway, your car tends to veer toward it. The reason is the same—the high velocity of the air
between the car and the truck creates a region of lower pressure, and the vehicles are pushed together by greater
pressure on the outside. (SeeFigure 12.4.) This effect was observed as far back as the mid-1800s, when it was
found that trains passing in opposite directions tipped precariously toward one another.
FIGURE12.4An overhead view of a car passing a truck on a highway. Air passing between the vehicles flows in a narrower channel and
must increase its speed ( is greater than ), causing the pressure between them to drop ( is less than ). Greater pressure on the
outside pushes the car and truck together.
Making Connections: Take-Home Investigation with a Sheet of Paper
Hold the short edge of a sheet of paper parallel to your mouth with one hand on each side of your mouth. The
page should slant downward over your hands. Blow over the top of the page. Describe what happens and explain
the reason for this behavior.
Bernoulli’s Equation
The relationship between pressure and velocity in fluids is described quantitatively byBernoulli’s equation, named
after its discoverer, the Swiss scientist Daniel Bernoulli (1700–1782). Bernoulli’s equation states that for an
incompressible, frictionless fluid, the following sum is constant:
12.17
where is the absolute pressure, is the fluid density, is the velocity of the fluid, is the height above some
reference point, and is the acceleration due to gravity. If we follow a small volume of fluid along its path, various
quantities in the sum may change, but the total remains constant. Let the subscripts 1 and 2 refer to any two points
along the path that the bit of fluid follows; Bernoulli’s equation becomes
12.18
Bernoulli’s equation is a form of the conservation of energy principle. Note that the second and third terms are the
kinetic and potential energy with replaced by . In fact, each term in the equation has units of energy per unit
volume. We can prove this for the second term by substituting into it and gathering terms:
12.19
So is the kinetic energy per unit volume. Making the same substitution into the third term in the equation, we
find
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 513
12.2 • Bernoulli’s Equation 495
12.20
so is the gravitational potential energy per unit volume. Note that pressure has units of energy per unit
volume, too. Since , its units are . If we multiply these by m/m, we obtain , or
energy per unit volume. Bernoulli’s equation is, in fact, just a convenient statement of conservation of energy for an
incompressible fluid in the absence of friction.
Making Connections: Conservation of Energy
Conservation of energy applied to fluid flow produces Bernoulli’s equation. The net work done by the fluid’s
pressure results in changes in the fluid’s and per unit volume. If other forms of energy are involved in
fluid flow, Bernoulli’s equation can be modified to take these forms into account. Such forms of energy include
thermal energy dissipated because of fluid viscosity.
The general form of Bernoulli’s equation has three terms in it, and it is broadly applicable. To understand it better,
we will look at a number of specific situations that simplify and illustrate its use and meaning.
Bernoulli’s Equation for Static Fluids
Let us first consider the very simple situation where the fluid is static—that is, . Bernoulli’s equation in
that case is
12.21
We can further simplify the equation by taking (we can always choose some height to be zero, just as we
often have done for other situations involving the gravitational force, and take all other heights to be relative to this).
In that case, we get
12.22
This equation tells us that, in static fluids, pressure increases with depth. As we go from point 1 to point 2 in the
fluid, the depth increases by , and consequently, is greater than by an amount . In the very simplest
case, is zero at the top of the fluid, and we get the familiar relationship . (Recall that and
) Bernoulli’s equation includes the fact that the pressure due to the weight of a fluid is . Although
we introduce Bernoulli’s equation for fluid flow, it includes much of what we studied for static fluids in the preceding
chapter.
Bernoulli’s Principle—Bernoulli’s Equation at Constant Depth
Another important situation is one in which the fluid moves but its depth is constant—that is, . Under that
condition, Bernoulli’s equation becomes
12.23
Situations in which fluid flows at a constant depth are so important that this equation is often calledBernoulli’s
principle. It is Bernoulli’s equation for fluids at constant depth. (Note again that this applies to a small volume of
fluid as we follow it along its path.) As we have just discussed, pressure drops as speed increases in a moving fluid.
We can see this from Bernoulli’s principle. For example, if is greater than in the equation, then must be
less than for the equality to hold.
EXAMPLE 12.4
Calculating Pressure: Pressure Drops as a Fluid Speeds Up
InExample 12.2, we found that the speed of water in a hose increased from 1.96 m/s to 25.5 m/s going from the
hose to the nozzle. Calculate the pressure in the hose, given that the absolute pressure in the nozzle is
(atmospheric, as it must be) and assuming level, frictionless flow.
PAGE: 514
496 12 • Fluid Dynamics and Its Biological and Medical Applications
Strategy
Level flow means constant depth, so Bernoulli’s principle applies. We use the subscript 1 for values in the hose and
2 for those in the nozzle. We are thus asked to find .
Solution
Solving Bernoulli’s principle for yields
12.24
Substituting known values,
12.25
Discussion
This absolute pressure in the hose is greater than in the nozzle, as expected since is greater in the nozzle. The
pressure in the nozzle must be atmospheric since it emerges into the atmosphere without other changes in
conditions.
Applications of Bernoulli’s Principle
There are a number of devices and situations in which fluid flows at a constant height and, thus, can be analyzed
with Bernoulli’s principle.
Entrainment
People have long put the Bernoulli principle to work by using reduced pressure in high-velocity fluids to move things
about. With a higher pressure on the outside, the high-velocity fluid forces other fluids into the stream. This process
is calledentrainment. Entrainment devices have been in use since ancient times, particularly as pumps to raise
water small heights, as in draining swamps, fields, or other low-lying areas. Some other devices that use the concept
of entrainment are shown inFigure 12.5.
FIGURE12.5Examples of entrainment devices that use increased fluid speed to create low pressures, which then entrain one fluid into
another. (a) A Bunsen burner uses an adjustable gas nozzle, entraining air for proper combustion. (b) An atomizer uses a squeeze bulb to
create a jet of air that entrains drops of perfume. Paint sprayers and carburetors use very similar techniques to move their respective
liquids. (c) A common aspirator uses a high-speed stream of water to create a region of lower pressure. Aspirators may be used as suction
pumps in dental and surgical situations or for draining a flooded basement or producing a reduced pressure in a vessel. (d) The chimney of
a water heater is designed to entrain air into the pipe leading through the ceiling.
Wings and Sails
The airplane wing is a beautiful example of Bernoulli’s principle in action.Figure 12.6(a) shows the characteristic
shape of a wing. The wing is tilted upward at a small angle and the upper surface is longer, causing air to flow faster
over it. The pressure on top of the wing is therefore reduced, creating a net upward force or lift. (Wings can also gain
lift by pushing air downward, utilizing the conservation of momentum principle. The deflected air molecules result in
an upward force on the wing — Newton’s third law.) Sails also have the characteristic shape of a wing. (SeeFigure
12.6(b).) The pressure on the front side of the sail, , is lower than the pressure on the back of the sail, .
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 515
12.2 • Bernoulli’s Equation 497
This results in a forward force and even allows you to sail into the wind.
Making Connections: Take-Home Investigation with Two Strips of Paper
For a good illustration of Bernoulli’s principle, make two strips of paper, each about 15 cm long and 4 cm wide.
Hold the small end of one strip up to your lips and let it drape over your finger. Blow across the paper. What
happens? Now hold two strips of paper up to your lips, separated by your fingers. Blow between the strips. What
happens?
Velocity measurement
Figure 12.7shows two devices that measure fluid velocity based on Bernoulli’s principle. The manometer inFigure
12.7(a) is connected to two tubes that are small enough not to appreciably disturb the flow. The tube facing the
oncoming fluid creates a dead spot having zero velocity ( ) in front of it, while fluid passing the other tube has
velocity . This means that Bernoulli’s principle as stated in becomes
12.26
FIGURE12.6(a) The Bernoulli principle helps explain lift generated by a wing. (b) Sails use the same technique to generate part of their
thrust.
Thus pressure over the second opening is reduced by , and so the fluid in the manometer rises by on the
side connected to the second opening, where
12.27
(Recall that the symbol means “proportional to.”) Solving for , we see that
12.28
Figure 12.7(b) shows a version of this device that is in common use for measuring various fluid velocities; such
devices are frequently used as air speed indicators in aircraft.
PAGE: 516
498 12 • Fluid Dynamics and Its Biological and Medical Applications
FIGURE12.7Measurement of fluid speed based on Bernoulli’s principle. (a) A manometer is connected to two tubes that are close together
and small enough not to disturb the flow. Tube 1 is open at the end facing the flow. A dead spot having zero speed is created there. Tube 2
has an opening on the side, and so the fluid has a speed across the opening; thus, pressure there drops. The difference in pressure at the
manometer is , and so is proportional to . (b) This type of velocity measuring device is a Prandtl tube, also known as a pitot
tube.
12.3 The Most General Applications of Bernoulli’s Equation
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Calculate using Torricelli’s theorem.
• Calculate power in fluid flow.
Torricelli’s Theorem
Figure 12.8shows water gushing from a large tube through a dam. What is its speed as it emerges? Interestingly, if
resistance is negligible, the speed is just what it would be if the water fell a distance from the surface of the
reservoir; the water’s speed is independent of the size of the opening. Let us check this out. Bernoulli’s equation
must be used since the depth is not constant. We consider water flowing from the surface (point 1) to the tube’s
outlet (point 2). Bernoulli’s equation as stated in previously is
12.29
Both and equal atmospheric pressure( is atmospheric pressure because it is the pressure at the top of the
reservoir. must be atmospheric pressure, since the emerging water is surrounded by the atmosphere and cannot
have a pressure different from atmospheric pressure.) and subtract out of the equation, leaving
12.30
Solving this equation for , noting that the density cancels (because the fluid is incompressible), yields
12.31
We let ; the equation then becomes
12.32
where is the height dropped by the water. This is simply a kinematic equation for any object falling a distance
with negligible resistance. In fluids, this last equation is calledTorricelli’s theorem. Note that the result is
independent of the velocity’s direction, just as we found when applying conservation of energy to falling objects.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 517
12.3 • The Most General Applications of Bernoulli’s Equation 499
FIGURE12.8(a) Water gushes from the base of the Studen Kladenetz dam in Bulgaria. (credit: Kiril Kapustin;
http://www.ImagesFromBulgaria.com) (b) In the absence of significant resistance, water flows from the reservoir with the same speed it
would have if it fell the distance without friction. This is an example of Torricelli’s theorem.
FIGURE12.9Pressure in the nozzle of this fire hose is less than at ground level for two reasons: the water has to go uphill to get to the
nozzle, and speed increases in the nozzle. In spite of its lowered pressure, the water can exert a large force on anything it strikes, by virtue
of its kinetic energy. Pressure in the water stream becomes equal to atmospheric pressure once it emerges into the air.
All preceding applications of Bernoulli’s equation involved simplifying conditions, such as constant height or
constant pressure. The next example is a more general application of Bernoulli’s equation in which pressure,
PAGE: 518
500 12 • Fluid Dynamics and Its Biological and Medical Applications
velocity, and height all change. (SeeFigure 12.9.)
EXAMPLE 12.5
Calculating Pressure: A Fire Hose Nozzle
Fire hoses used in major structure fires have inside diameters of 6.40 cm. Suppose such a hose carries a flow of
40.0 L/s starting at a gauge pressure of . The hose goes 10.0 m up a ladder to a nozzle having an
inside diameter of 3.00 cm. Assuming negligible resistance, what is the pressure in the nozzle?
Strategy
Here we must use Bernoulli’s equation to solve for the pressure, since depth is not constant.
Solution
Bernoulli’s equation states
12.33
where the subscripts 1 and 2 refer to the initial conditions at ground level and the final conditions inside the nozzle,
respectively. We must first find the speeds and . Since , we get
12.34
Similarly, we find
12.35
(This rather large speed is helpful in reaching the fire.) Now, taking to be zero, we solve Bernoulli’s equation for
:
12.36
Substituting known values yields
12.37
Discussion
This value is a gauge pressure, since the initial pressure was given as a gauge pressure. Thus the nozzle pressure is
very close to atmospheric pressure, as it must because the water exits into the atmosphere without changes in its
conditions.
Power in Fluid Flow
Power is therateat which work is done or energy in any form is used or supplied. To see the relationship of power to
fluid flow, consider Bernoulli’s equation:
12.38
All three terms have units of energy per unit volume, as discussed in the previous section. Now, considering units, if
we multiply energy per unit volume by flow rate (volume per unit time), we get units of power. That is,
. This means that if we multiply Bernoulli’s equation by flow rate , we get power. In equation
form, this is
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 519
12.4 • Viscosity and Laminar Flow; Poiseuille’s Law 501
12.39
Each term has a clear physical meaning. For example, is the power supplied to a fluid, perhaps by a pump, to
give it its pressure . Similarly, is the power supplied to a fluid to give it its kinetic energy. And is the
power going to gravitational potential energy.
Making Connections: Power
Power is defined as the rate of energy transferred, or . Fluid flow involves several types of power. Each type
of power is identified with a specific type of energy being expended or changed in form.
EXAMPLE 12.6
Calculating Power in a Moving Fluid
Suppose the fire hose in the previous example is fed by a pump that receives water through a hose with a 6.40-cm
diameter coming from a hydrant with a pressure of . What power does the pump supply to the
water?
Strategy
Here we must consider energy forms as well as how they relate to fluid flow. Since the input and output hoses have
the same diameters and are at the same height, the pump does not change the speed of the water nor its height,
and so the water’s kinetic energy and gravitational potential energy are unchanged. That means the pump only
supplies power to increase water pressure by (from to ).
Solution
As discussed above, the power associated with pressure is
12.40
Discussion
Such a substantial amount of power requires a large pump, such as is found on some fire trucks. (This kilowatt value
converts to about 50 hp.) The pump in this example increases only the water’s pressure. If a pump—such as the
heart—directly increases velocity and height as well as pressure, we would have to calculate all three terms to find
the power it supplies.
12.4 Viscosity and Laminar Flow; Poiseuille’s Law
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define laminar flow and turbulent flow.
• Explain what viscosity is.
• Calculate flow and resistance with Poiseuille’s law.
• Explain how pressure drops due to resistance.
Laminar Flow and Viscosity
When you pour yourself a glass of juice, the liquid flows freely and quickly. But when you pour syrup on your
pancakes, that liquid flows slowly and sticks to the pitcher. The difference is fluid friction, both within the fluid itself
and between the fluid and its surroundings. We call this property of fluidsviscosity. Juice has low viscosity, whereas
PAGE: 520
502 12 • Fluid Dynamics and Its Biological and Medical Applications
syrup has high viscosity. In the previous sections we have considered ideal fluids with little or no viscosity. In this
section, we will investigate what factors, including viscosity, affect the rate of fluid flow.
The precise definition of viscosity is based onlaminar, or nonturbulent, flow. Before we can define viscosity, then,
we need to define laminar flow and turbulent flow.Figure 12.10shows both types of flow.Laminarflow is
characterized by the smooth flow of the fluid in layers that do not mix. Turbulent flow, orturbulence, is
characterized by eddies and swirls that mix layers of fluid together.
FIGURE12.10Smoke rises smoothly for a while and then begins to form swirls and eddies. The smooth flow is called laminar flow,
whereas the swirls and eddies typify turbulent flow. If you watch the smoke (being careful not to breathe on it), you will notice that it rises
more rapidly when flowing smoothly than after it becomes turbulent, implying that turbulence poses more resistance to flow. (credit:
Creativity103)
Figure 12.11shows schematically how laminar and turbulent flow differ. Layers flow without mixing when flow is
laminar. When there is turbulence, the layers mix, and there are significant velocities in directions other than the
overall direction of flow. The lines that are shown in many illustrations are the paths followed by small volumes of
fluids. These are calledstreamlines. Streamlines are smooth and continuous when flow is laminar, but break up and
mix when flow is turbulent. Turbulence has two main causes. First, any obstruction or sharp corner, such as in a
faucet, creates turbulence by imparting velocities perpendicular to the flow. Second, high speeds cause turbulence.
The drag both between adjacent layers of fluid and between the fluid and its surroundings forms swirls and eddies,
if the speed is great enough. We shall concentrate on laminar flow for the remainder of this section, leaving certain
aspects of turbulence for later sections.
FIGURE12.11(a) Laminar flow occurs in layers without mixing. Notice that viscosity causes drag between layers as well as with the fixed
surface. (b) An obstruction in the vessel produces turbulence. Turbulent flow mixes the fluid. There is more interaction, greater heating, and
more resistance than in laminar flow.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 521
12.4 • Viscosity and Laminar Flow; Poiseuille’s Law 503
Making Connections: Take-Home Experiment: Go Down to the River
Try dropping simultaneously two sticks into a flowing river, one near the edge of the river and one near the
middle. Which one travels faster? Why?
Figure 12.12shows how viscosity is measured for a fluid. Two parallel plates have the specific fluid between them.
The bottom plate is held fixed, while the top plate is moved to the right, dragging fluid with it. The layer (or lamina)
of fluid in contact with either plate does not move relative to the plate, and so the top layer moves at while the
bottom layer remains at rest. Each successive layer from the top down exerts a force on the one below it, trying to
drag it along, producing a continuous variation in speed from to 0 as shown. Care is taken to insure that the flow is
laminar; that is, the layers do not mix. The motion inFigure 12.12is like a continuous shearing motion. Fluids have
zero shear strength, but therateat which they are sheared is related to the same geometrical factors and as is
shear deformation for solids.
FIGURE12.12The graphic shows laminar flow of fluid between two plates of area . The bottom plate is fixed. When the top plate is
pushed to the right, it drags the fluid along with it.
A force is required to keep the top plate inFigure 12.12moving at a constant velocity , and experiments have
shown that this force depends on four factors. First, is directly proportional to (until the speed is so high that
turbulence occurs—then a much larger force is needed, and it has a more complicated dependence on ). Second,
is proportional to the area of the plate. This relationship seems reasonable, since is directly proportional to the
amount of fluid being moved. Third, is inversely proportional to the distance between the plates . This
relationship is also reasonable; is like a lever arm, and the greater the lever arm, the less force that is needed.
Fourth, is directly proportional tothe coefficient of viscosity, . The greater the viscosity, the greater the force
required. These dependencies are combined into the equation
12.41
which gives us a working definition of fluidviscosity .Solving for gives
12.42
which defines viscosity in terms of how it is measured. The SI unit of viscosity is
.Table 12.1lists the coefficients of viscosity for various fluids.
Viscosity varies from one fluid to another by several orders of magnitude. As you might expect, the viscosities of
gases are much less than those of liquids, and these viscosities are often temperature dependent. The viscosity of
blood can be reduced by aspirin consumption, allowing it to flow more easily around the body. (When used over the
long term in low doses, aspirin can help prevent heart attacks, and reduce the risk of blood clotting.)
Laminar Flow Confined to Tubes—Poiseuille’s Law
What causes flow? The answer, not surprisingly, is pressure difference. In fact, there is a very simple relationship
between horizontal flow and pressure. Flow rate is in the direction from high to low pressure. The greater the
pressure differential between two points, the greater the flow rate. This relationship can be stated as
PAGE: 522
504 12 • Fluid Dynamics and Its Biological and Medical Applications
12.43
where and are the pressures at two points, such as at either end of a tube, and is the resistance to flow.
The resistance includes everything, except pressure, that affects flow rate. For example, is greater for a long
tube than for a short one. The greater the viscosity of a fluid, the greater the value of . Turbulence greatly
increases , whereas increasing the diameter of a tube decreases .
If viscosity is zero, the fluid is frictionless and the resistance to flow is also zero. Comparing frictionless flow in a
tube to viscous flow, as inFigure 12.13, we see that for a viscous fluid, speed is greatest at midstream because of
drag at the boundaries. We can see the effect of viscosity in a Bunsen burner flame, even though the viscosity of
natural gas is small.
The resistance to laminar flow of an incompressible fluid having viscosity through a horizontal tube of uniform
radius and length , such as the one inFigure 12.14, is given by
12.44
This equation is calledPoiseuille’s law for resistanceafter the French scientist J. L. Poiseuille (1799–1869), who
derived it in an attempt to understand the flow of blood, an often turbulent fluid.
FIGURE12.13(a) If fluid flow in a tube has negligible resistance, the speed is the same all across the tube. (b) When a viscous fluid flows
through a tube, its speed at the walls is zero, increasing steadily to its maximum at the center of the tube. (c) The shape of the Bunsen
burner flame is due to the velocity profile across the tube. (credit: Jason Woodhead)
Let us examine Poiseuille’s expression for to see if it makes good intuitive sense. We see that resistance is directly
proportional to both fluid viscosity and the length of a tube. After all, both of these directly affect the amount of
friction encountered—the greater either is, the greater the resistance and the smaller the flow. The radius of a tube
affects the resistance, which again makes sense, because the greater the radius, the greater the flow (all other
factors remaining the same). But it is surprising that is raised to thefourthpower in Poiseuille’s law. This exponent
means that any change in the radius of a tube has a very large effect on resistance. For example, doubling the radius
of a tube decreases resistance by a factor of .
Taken together, and give the following expression for flow rate:
12.45
This equation describes laminar flow through a tube. It is sometimes called Poiseuille’s law for laminar flow, or
simplyPoiseuille’s law.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 523
12.4 • Viscosity and Laminar Flow; Poiseuille’s Law 505
EXAMPLE 12.7
Using Flow Rate: Plaque Deposits Reduce Blood Flow
Suppose the flow rate of blood in a coronary artery has been reduced to half its normal value by plaque deposits. By
what factor has the radius of the artery been reduced, assuming no turbulence occurs?
Strategy
Assuming laminar flow, Poiseuille’s law states that
12.46
We need to compare the artery radius before and after the flow rate reduction.
Solution
With a constant pressure difference assumed and the same length and viscosity, along the artery we have
12.47
So, given that , we find that .
Therefore, , a decrease in the artery radius of 16%.
Discussion
This decrease in radius is surprisingly small for this situation. To restore the blood flow in spite of this buildup would
require an increase in the pressure difference of a factor of two, with subsequent strain on the heart.
Fluid Temperature (ºC) Viscosity
Gases
0 0.0171
20 0.0181
Air
40 0.0190
100 0.0218
Ammonia 20 0.00974
Carbon dioxide 20 0.0147
Helium 20 0.0196
Hydrogen 0 0.0090
Mercury 20 0.0450
Oxygen 20 0.0203
TABLE12.1Coefficients of Viscosity of Various Fluids
PAGE: 524
506 12 • Fluid Dynamics and Its Biological and Medical Applications
Fluid Temperature (ºC) Viscosity
Steam 100 0.0130
Liquids
0 1.792
20 1.002
Water 37 0.6947
40 0.653
100 0.282
20 3.015
1
Whole blood
37 2.084
20 1.810
2
Blood plasma
37 1.257
Ethyl alcohol 20 1.20
Methanol 20 0.584
Oil (heavy machine) 20 660
Oil (motor, SAE 10) 30 200
Oil (olive) 20 138
Glycerin 20 1500
Honey 20 2000–10000
Maple Syrup 20 2000–3000
Milk 20 3.0
Oil (Corn) 20 65
TABLE12.1Coefficients of Viscosity of Various Fluids
The circulatory system provides many examples of Poiseuille’s law in action—with blood flow regulated by changes
in vessel size and blood pressure. Blood vessels are not rigid but elastic. Adjustments to blood flow are primarily
made by varying the size of the vessels, since the resistance is so sensitive to the radius. During vigorous exercise,
blood vessels are selectively dilated to important muscles and organs and blood pressure increases. This creates
both greater overall blood flow and increased flow to specific areas. Conversely, decreases in vessel radii, perhaps
1 The ratios of the viscosities of blood to water are nearly constant between 0°C and 37°C.
2 See note on Whole Blood.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 525
12.4 • Viscosity and Laminar Flow; Poiseuille’s Law 507
from plaques in the arteries, can greatly reduce blood flow. If a vessel’s radius is reduced by only 5% (to 0.95 of its
original value), the flow rate is reduced to about of its original value. A 19% decrease in flow is
caused by a 5% decrease in radius. The body may compensate by increasing blood pressure by 19%, but this
presents hazards to the heart and any vessel that has weakened walls. Another example comes from automobile
engine oil. If you have a car with an oil pressure gauge, you may notice that oil pressure is high when the engine is
cold. Motor oil has greater viscosity when cold than when warm, and so pressure must be greater to pump the same
amount of cold oil.
FIGURE12.14Poiseuille’s law applies to laminar flow of an incompressible fluid of viscosity through a tube of length and radius . The
direction of flow is from greater to lower pressure. Flow rate is directly proportional to the pressure difference , and inversely
proportional to the length of the tube and viscosity of the fluid. Flow rate increases with , the fourth power of the radius.
EXAMPLE 12.8
What Pressure Produces This Flow Rate?
An intravenous (IV) system is supplying saline solution to a patient at the rate of through a needle of
radius 0.150 mm and length 2.50 cm. What pressure is needed at the entrance of the needle to cause this flow,
assuming the viscosity of the saline solution to be the same as that of water? The gauge pressure of the blood in the
patient’s vein is 8.00 mm Hg. (Assume that the temperature is .)
Strategy
Assuming laminar flow, Poiseuille’s law applies. This is given by
12.48
where is the pressure at the entrance of the needle and is the pressure in the vein. The only unknown is .
Solution
Solving for yields
12.49
is given as 8.00 mm Hg, which converts to . Substituting this and the other known values
yields
12.50
Discussion
This pressure could be supplied by an IV bottle with the surface of the saline solution 1.61 m above the entrance to
the needle (this is left for you to solve in this chapter’s Problems and Exercises), assuming that there is negligible
pressure drop in the tubing leading to the needle.
PAGE: 526
508 12 • Fluid Dynamics and Its Biological and Medical Applications
Flow and Resistance as Causes of Pressure Drops
You may have noticed that water pressure in your home might be lower than normal on hot summer days when
there is more use. This pressure drop occurs in the water main before it reaches your home. Let us consider flow
through the water main as illustrated inFigure 12.15. We can understand why the pressure to the home drops
during times of heavy use by rearranging
12.51
to
12.52
where, in this case, is the pressure at the water works and is the resistance of the water main. During times of
heavy use, the flow rate is large. This means that must also be large. Thus must decrease. It is
correct to think of flow and resistance as causing the pressure to drop from to . is valid for
both laminar and turbulent flows.
FIGURE12.15During times of heavy use, there is a significant pressure drop in a water main, and supplied to users is significantly less
than created at the water works. If the flow is very small, then the pressure drop is negligible, and .
We can use to analyze pressure drops occurring in more complex systems in which the tube radius
is not the same everywhere. Resistance will be much greater in narrow places, such as an obstructed coronary
artery. For a given flow rate , the pressure drop will be greatest where the tube is most narrow. This is how water
faucets control flow. Additionally, is greatly increased by turbulence, and a constriction that creates turbulence
greatly reduces the pressure downstream. Plaque in an artery reduces pressure and hence flow, both by its
resistance and by the turbulence it creates.
Figure 12.16is a schematic of the human circulatory system, showing average blood pressures in its major parts for
an adult at rest. Pressure created by the heart’s two pumps, the right and left ventricles, is reduced by the
resistance of the blood vessels as the blood flows through them. The left ventricle increases arterial blood pressure
that drives the flow of blood through all parts of the body except the lungs. The right ventricle receives the lower
pressure blood from two major veins and pumps it through the lungs for gas exchange with atmospheric gases – the
disposal of carbon dioxide from the blood and the replenishment of oxygen. Only one major organ is shown
schematically, with typical branching of arteries to ever smaller vessels, the smallest of which are the capillaries,
and rejoining of small veins into larger ones. Similar branching takes place in a variety of organs in the body, and the
circulatory system has considerable flexibility in flow regulation to these organs by the dilation and constriction of
the arteries leading to them and the capillaries within them. The sensitivity of flow to tube radius makes this
flexibility possible over a large range of flow rates.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 527
12.5 • The Onset of Turbulence 509
FIGURE12.16Schematic of the circulatory system. Pressure difference is created by the two pumps in the heart and is reduced by
resistance in the vessels. Branching of vessels into capillaries allows blood to reach individual cells and exchange substances, such as
oxygen and waste products, with them. The system has an impressive ability to regulate flow to individual organs, accomplished largely by
varying vessel diameters.
Each branching of larger vessels into smaller vessels increases the total cross-sectional area of the tubes through
which the blood flows. For example, an artery with a cross section of may branch into 20 smaller arteries,
each with cross sections of , with a total of . In that manner, the resistance of the branchings is
reduced so that pressure is not entirely lost. Moreover, because and increases through branching, the
average velocity of the blood in the smaller vessels is reduced. The blood velocity in the aorta ( ) is
about 25 cm/s, while in the capillaries ( in diameter) the velocity is about 1 mm/s. This reduced velocity
allows the blood to exchange substances with the cells in the capillaries and alveoli in particular.
12.5 The Onset of Turbulence
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Calculate Reynolds number.
• Use the Reynolds number for a system to determine whether it is laminar or turbulent.
Sometimes we can predict if flow will be laminar or turbulent. We know that flow in a very smooth tube or around a
smooth, streamlined object will be laminar at low velocity. We also know that at high velocity, even flow in a smooth
tube or around a smooth object will experience turbulence. In between, it is more difficult to predict. In fact, at
intermediate velocities, flow may oscillate back and forth indefinitely between laminar and turbulent.
An occlusion, or narrowing, of an artery, such as shown inFigure 12.17, is likely to cause turbulence because of the
irregularity of the blockage, as well as the complexity of blood as a fluid. Turbulence in the circulatory system is
noisy and can sometimes be detected with a stethoscope, such as when measuring diastolic pressure in the upper
arm’s partially collapsed brachial artery. These turbulent sounds, at the onset of blood flow when the cuff pressure
becomes sufficiently small, are calledKorotkoff sounds. Aneurysms, or ballooning of arteries, create significant
turbulence and can sometimes be detected with a stethoscope. Heart murmurs, consistent with their name, are
sounds produced by turbulent flow around damaged and insufficiently closed heart valves. Ultrasound can also be
PAGE: 528
510 12 • Fluid Dynamics and Its Biological and Medical Applications
used to detect turbulence as a medical indicator in a process analogous to Doppler-shift radar used to detect
storms.
FIGURE12.17Flow is laminar in the large part of this blood vessel and turbulent in the part narrowed by plaque, where velocity is high. In
the transition region, the flow can oscillate chaotically between laminar and turbulent flow.
An indicator called theReynolds number can reveal whether flow is laminar or turbulent. For flow in a tube of
uniform diameter, the Reynolds number is defined as
12.53
where is the fluid density, its speed, its viscosity, and the tube radius. The Reynolds number is a unitless
quantity. Experiments have revealed that is related to the onset of turbulence. For below about 2000, flow
is laminar. For above about 3000, flow is turbulent. For values of between about 2000 and 3000, flow is
unstable—that is, it can be laminar, but small obstructions and surface roughness can make it turbulent, and it may
oscillate randomly between being laminar and turbulent. The blood flow through most of the body is a quiet, laminar
flow. The exception is in the aorta, where the speed of the blood flow rises above a critical value of 35 m/s and
becomes turbulent.
EXAMPLE 12.9
Is This Flow Laminar or Turbulent?
Calculate the Reynolds number for flow in the needle considered inExample 12.8to verify the assumption that the
flow is laminar. Assume that the density of the saline solution is .
Strategy
We have all of the information needed, except the fluid speed , which can be calculated from
(verification of this is in this chapter’s Problems and Exercises).
Solution
Entering the known values into gives
12.54
Discussion
Since is well below 2000, the flow should indeed be laminar.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 529
12.6 • Motion of an Object in a Viscous Fluid 511
Take-Home Experiment: Inhalation
Under the conditions of normal activity, an adult inhales about 1L of air during each inhalation. With the aid of a
watch, determine the time for one of your own inhalations by timing several breaths and dividing the total length
by the number of breaths. Calculate the average flow rate of air traveling through the trachea during each
inhalation.
The topic of chaos has become quite popular over the last few decades. A system is defined to bechaoticwhen its
behavior is so sensitive to some factor that it is extremely difficult to predict. The field ofchaosis the study of
chaotic behavior. A good example of chaotic behavior is the flow of a fluid with a Reynolds number between 2000
and 3000. Whether or not the flow is turbulent is difficult, but not impossible, to predict—the difficulty lies in the
extremely sensitive dependence on factors like roughness and obstructions on the nature of the flow. A tiny
variation in one factor has an exaggerated (or nonlinear) effect on the flow. Phenomena as disparate as turbulence,
the orbit of Pluto, and the onset of irregular heartbeats are chaotic and can be analyzed with similar techniques.
12.6 Motion of an Object in a Viscous Fluid
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Calculate the Reynolds number for an object moving through a fluid.
• Explain whether the Reynolds number indicates laminar or turbulent flow.
• Describe the conditions under which an object has a terminal speed.
A moving object in a viscous fluid is equivalent to a stationary object in a flowing fluid stream. (For example, when
you ride a bicycle at 10 m/s in still air, you feel the air in your face exactly as if you were stationary in a 10-m/s
wind.) Flow of the stationary fluid around a moving object may be laminar, turbulent, or a combination of the two.
Just as with flow in tubes, it is possible to predict when a moving object creates turbulence. We use another form of
the Reynolds number , defined for an object moving in a fluid to be
12.55
where is a characteristic length of the object (a sphere’s diameter, for example), the fluid density, its viscosity,
and the object’s speed in the fluid. If is less than about 1, flow around the object can be laminar, particularly if
the object has a smooth shape. The transition to turbulent flow occurs for between 1 and about 10, depending
on surface roughness and so on. Depending on the surface, there can be aturbulent wakebehind the object with
some laminar flow over its surface. For an between 10 and , the flow may be either laminar or turbulent and
may oscillate between the two. For greater than about , the flow is entirely turbulent, even at the surface of
the object. (SeeFigure 12.18.) Laminar flow occurs mostly when the objects in the fluid are small, such as
raindrops, pollen, and blood cells in plasma.
EXAMPLE 12.10
Does a Ball Have a Turbulent Wake?
Calculate the Reynolds number for a ball with a 7.40-cm diameter thrown at 40.0 m/s.
Strategy
We can use to calculate , since all values in it are either given or can be found in tables of density
and viscosity.
Solution
Substituting values into the equation for yields
PAGE: 530
512 12 • Fluid Dynamics and Its Biological and Medical Applications
12.56
Discussion
This value is sufficiently high to imply a turbulent wake. Most large objects, such as airplanes and sailboats, create
significant turbulence as they move. As noted before, the Bernoulli principle gives only qualitatively-correct results
in such situations.
One of the consequences of viscosity is a resistance force calledviscous drag that is exerted on a moving
object. This force typically depends on the object’s speed (in contrast with simple friction). Experiments have shown
that for laminar flow ( less than about one) viscous drag is proportional to speed, whereas for between
about 10 and , viscous drag is proportional to speed squared. (This relationship is a strong dependence and is
pertinent to bicycle racing, where even a small headwind causes significantly increased drag on the racer. Cyclists
take turns being the leader in the pack for this reason.) For greater than , drag increases dramatically and
behaves with greater complexity. For laminar flow around a sphere, is proportional to fluid viscosity , the
object’s characteristic size , and its speed . All of which makes sense—the more viscous the fluid and the larger
the object, the more drag we expect. Recall Stoke’s law . For the special case of a small sphere of radius
moving slowly in a fluid of viscosity , the drag force is given by
12.57
FIGURE12.18(a) Motion of this sphere to the right is equivalent to fluid flow to the left. Here the flow is laminar with less than 1. There
is a force, called viscous drag , to the left on the ball due to the fluid’s viscosity. (b) At a higher speed, the flow becomes partially
turbulent, creating a wake starting where the flow lines separate from the surface. Pressure in the wake is less than in front of the sphere,
because fluid speed is less, creating a net force to the left that is significantly greater than for laminar flow. Here is greater than 10.
(c) At much higher speeds, where is greater than , flow becomes turbulent everywhere on the surface and behind the sphere. Drag
increases dramatically.
An interesting consequence of the increase in with speed is that an object falling through a fluid will not
continue to accelerate indefinitely (as it would if we neglect air resistance, for example). Instead, viscous drag
increases, slowing acceleration, until a critical speed, called theterminal speed, is reached and the acceleration of
the object becomes zero. Once this happens, the object continues to fall at constant speed (the terminal speed).
This is the case for particles of sand falling in the ocean, cells falling in a centrifuge, and sky divers falling through
the air.Figure 12.19shows some of the factors that affect terminal speed. There is a viscous drag on the object that
depends on the viscosity of the fluid and the size of the object. But there is also a buoyant force that depends on the
density of the object relative to the fluid. Terminal speed will be greatest for low-viscosity fluids and objects with
high densities and small sizes. Thus a skydiver falls more slowly with outspread limbs than when they are in a pike
position—head first with hands at their side and legs together.
Take-Home Experiment: Don’t Lose Your Marbles
By measuring the terminal speed of a slowly moving sphere in a viscous fluid, one can find the viscosity of that
fluid (at that temperature). It can be difficult to find small ball bearings around the house, but a small marble will
do. Gather two or three fluids (syrup, motor oil, honey, olive oil, etc.) and a thick, tall clear glass or vase. Drop the
marble into the center of the fluid and time its fall (after letting it drop a little to reach its terminal speed).
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 531
12.7 • Molecular Transport Phenomena: Diffusion, Osmosis, and Related Processes 513
Compare your values for the terminal speed and see if they are inversely proportional to the viscosities as listed
inTable 12.1. Does it make a difference if the marble is dropped near the side of the glass?
Knowledge of terminal speed is useful for estimating sedimentation rates of small particles. We know from watching
mud settle out of dirty water that sedimentation is usually a slow process. Centrifuges are used to speed
sedimentation by creating accelerated frames in which gravitational acceleration is replaced by centripetal
acceleration, which can be much greater, increasing the terminal speed.
FIGURE12.19There are three forces acting on an object falling through a viscous fluid: its weight , the viscous drag , and the buoyant
force .
12.7 Molecular Transport Phenomena: Diffusion, Osmosis, and Related
Processes
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define diffusion, osmosis, dialysis, and active transport.
• Calculate diffusion rates.
Diffusion
There is something fishy about the ice cube from your freezer—how did it pick up those food odors? How does
soaking a sprained ankle in Epsom salt reduce swelling? The answer to these questions are related to atomic and
molecular transport phenomena—another mode of fluid motion. Atoms and molecules are in constant motion at any
temperature. In fluids they move about randomly even in the absence of macroscopic flow. This motion is called a
random walk and is illustrated inFigure 12.20.Diffusionis the movement of substances due to random thermal
molecular motion. Fluids, like fish fumes or odors entering ice cubes, can even diffuse through solids.
Diffusion is a slow process over macroscopic distances. The densities of common materials are great enough that
molecules cannot travel very far before having a collision that can scatter them in any direction, including straight
backward. It can be shown that the average distance that a molecule travels is proportional to the square root
of time:
12.58
where stands for theroot-mean-square distanceand is the statistical average for the process. The quantity
is the diffusion constant for the particular molecule in a specific medium.Table 12.2lists representative values of
for various substances, in units of .
PAGE: 532
514 12 • Fluid Dynamics and Its Biological and Medical Applications
FIGURE12.20The random thermal motion of a molecule in a fluid in time . This type of motion is called a random walk.
Diffusing molecule Medium D(m2/s)
Hydrogen Air
Oxygen Air
Oxygen Water
Glucose Water
Hemoglobin Water
DNA Water
TABLE12.2Diffusion Constants for Various
3
Molecules
Note that gets progressively smaller for more massive molecules. This decrease is because the average
molecular speed at a given temperature is inversely proportional to molecular mass. Thus the more massive
molecules diffuse more slowly. Another interesting point is that for oxygen in air is much greater than for
oxygen in water. In water, an oxygen molecule makes many more collisions in its random walk and is slowed
considerably. In water, an oxygen molecule moves only about in 1 s. (Each molecule actually collides about
times per second!). Finally, note that diffusion constants increase with temperature, because average
molecular speed increases with temperature. This is because the average kinetic energy of molecules, , is
proportional to absolute temperature.
EXAMPLE 12.11
Calculating Diffusion: How Long Does Glucose Diffusion Take?
Calculate the average time it takes a glucose molecule to move 1.0 cm in water.
3 At 20°C and 1 atm
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 533
12.7 • Molecular Transport Phenomena: Diffusion, Osmosis, and Related Processes 515
Strategy
We can use , the expression for the average distance moved in time , and solve it for . All other
quantities are known.
Solution
Solving for and substituting known values yields
12.59
Discussion
This is a remarkably long time for glucose to move a mere centimeter! For this reason, we stir sugar into water rather
than waiting for it to diffuse.
Because diffusion is typically very slow, its most important effects occur over small distances. For example, the
cornea of the eye gets most of its oxygen by diffusion through the thin tear layer covering it.
The Rate and Direction of Diffusion
If you very carefully place a drop of food coloring in a still glass of water, it will slowly diffuse into the colorless
surroundings until its concentration is the same everywhere. This type of diffusion is called free diffusion, because
there are no barriers inhibiting it. Let us examine its direction and rate. Molecular motion is random in direction, and
so simple chance dictates that more molecules will move out of a region of high concentration than into it. The net
rate of diffusion is higher initially than after the process is partially completed. (SeeFigure 12.21.)
FIGURE12.21Diffusion proceeds from a region of higher concentration to a lower one. The net rate of movement is proportional to the
difference in concentration.
The net rate of diffusion is proportional to the concentration difference. Many more molecules will leave a region of
high concentration than will enter it from a region of low concentration. In fact, if the concentrations were the same,
there would benonet movement. The net rate of diffusion is also proportional to the diffusion constant , which is
determined experimentally. The farther a molecule can diffuse in a given time, the more likely it is to leave the
region of high concentration. Many of the factors that affect the rate are hidden in the diffusion constant . For
example, temperature and cohesive and adhesive forces all affect values of .
Diffusion is the dominant mechanism by which the exchange of nutrients and waste products occur between the
blood and tissue, and between air and blood in the lungs. In the evolutionary process, as organisms became larger,
they needed quicker methods of transportation than net diffusion, because of the larger distances involved in the
transport, leading to the development of circulatory systems. Less sophisticated, single-celled organisms still rely
totally on diffusion for the removal of waste products and the uptake of nutrients.
PAGE: 534
516 12 • Fluid Dynamics and Its Biological and Medical Applications
Osmosis and Dialysis—Diffusion across Membranes
Some of the most interesting examples of diffusion occur through barriers that affect the rates of diffusion. For
example, when you soak a swollen ankle in Epsom salt, water diffuses through your skin. Many substances regularly
move through cell membranes; oxygen moves in, carbon dioxide moves out, nutrients go in, and wastes go out, for
example. Because membranes are thin structures (typically to m across) diffusion rates
through them can be high. Diffusion through membranes is an important method of transport.
Membranes are generally selectively permeable, orsemipermeable. (SeeFigure 12.22.) One type of
semipermeable membrane has small pores that allow only small molecules to pass through. In other types of
membranes, the molecules may actually dissolve in the membrane or react with molecules in the membrane while
moving across. Membrane function, in fact, is the subject of much current research, involving not only physiology
but also chemistry and physics.
FIGURE12.22(a) A semipermeable membrane with small pores that allow only small molecules to pass through. (b) Certain molecules
dissolve in this membrane and diffuse across it.
Osmosisis the transport of water through a semipermeable membrane from a region of high concentration to a
region of low concentration. Osmosis is driven by the imbalance in water concentration. For example, water is more
concentrated in your body than in Epsom salt. When you soak a swollen ankle in Epsom salt, the water moves out of
your body into the lower-concentration region in the salt. Similarly,dialysisis the transport of any other molecule
through a semipermeable membrane due to its concentration difference. Both osmosis and dialysis are used by the
kidneys to cleanse the blood.
Osmosis can create a substantial pressure. Consider what happens if osmosis continues for some time, as
illustrated inFigure 12.23. Water moves by osmosis from the left into the region on the right, where it is less
concentrated, causing the solution on the right to rise. This movement will continue until the pressure created
by the extra height of fluid on the right is large enough to stop further osmosis. This pressure is called aback
pressure. The back pressure that stops osmosis is also called therelative osmotic pressureif neither solution
is pure water, and it is called theosmotic pressureif one solution is pure water. Osmotic pressure can be large,
depending on the size of the concentration difference. For example, if pure water and sea water are separated by a
semipermeable membrane that passes no salt, osmotic pressure will be 25.9 atm. This value means that water will
diffuse through the membrane until the salt water surface rises 268 m above the pure-water surface! One example
of pressure created by osmosis is turgor in plants (many wilt when too dry). Turgor describes the condition of a plant
in which the fluid in a cell exerts a pressure against the cell wall. This pressure gives the plant support. Dialysis can
similarly cause substantial pressures.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 535
12.7 • Molecular Transport Phenomena: Diffusion, Osmosis, and Related Processes 517
FIGURE12.23(a) Two sugar-water solutions of different concentrations, separated by a semipermeable membrane that passes water but
not sugar. Osmosis will be to the right, since water is less concentrated there. (b) The fluid level rises until the back pressure equals the
relative osmotic pressure; then, the net transfer of water is zero.
Reverse osmosisandreverse dialysis(also called filtration) are processes that occur when back pressure is
sufficient to reverse the normal direction of substances through membranes. Back pressure can be created naturally
as on the right side ofFigure 12.23. (A piston can also create this pressure.) Reverse osmosis can be used to
desalinate water by simply forcing it through a membrane that will not pass salt. Similarly, reverse dialysis can be
used to filter out any substance that a given membrane will not pass.
One further example of the movement of substances through membranes deserves mention. We sometimes find
that substances pass in the direction opposite to what we expect. Cypress tree roots, for example, extract pure
water from salt water, although osmosis would move it in the opposite direction. This is not reverse osmosis,
because there is no back pressure to cause it. What is happening is calledactive transport, a process in which a
living membrane expends energy to move substances across it. Many living membranes move water and other
substances by active transport. The kidneys, for example, not only use osmosis and dialysis—they also employ
significant active transport to move substances into and out of blood. In fact, it is estimated that at least 25% of the
body’s energy is expended on active transport of substances at the cellular level. The study of active transport
carries us into the realms of microbiology, biophysics, and biochemistry and it is a fascinating application of the laws
of nature to living structures.
PAGE: 536
518 12 • Glossary
Glossary
active transport the process in which a living Poiseuille’s law for resistance the resistance to
membrane expends energy to move substances laminar flow of an incompressible fluid in a tube:R=
across 8ηl/πr4
Bernoulli’s equation the equation resulting from relative osmotic pressure the back pressure which
applying conservation of energy to an stops the osmotic process if neither solution is pure
incompressible frictionless fluid:P+ 1/2pv2+pgh= water
constant , through the fluid reverse dialysis the process that occurs when back
Bernoulli’s principle Bernoulli’s equation applied at pressure is sufficient to reverse the normal direction
constant depth:P + 1/2pv2=P + 1/2pv2 of dialysis through membranes
1 1 2 2
dialysis the transport of any molecule other than reverse osmosis the process that occurs when back
water through a semipermeable membrane from a pressure is sufficient to reverse the normal direction
region of high concentration to one of low of osmosis through membranes
concentration Reynolds number a dimensionless parameter that
diffusion the movement of substances due to can reveal whether a particular flow is laminar or
random thermal molecular motion turbulent
flow rate abbreviatedQ, it is the volumeVthat flows semipermeable a type of membrane that allows only
past a particular point during a timet, orQ = V/t certain small molecules to pass through
fluid dynamics the physics of fluids in motion terminal speed the speed at which the viscous drag
laminar a type of fluid flow in which layers do not mix of an object falling in a viscous fluid is equal to the
liter a unit of volume, equal to 10−3m3 other forces acting on the object (such as gravity),
osmosis the transport of water through a so that the acceleration of the object is zero
semipermeable membrane from a region of high turbulence fluid flow in which layers mix together via
concentration to one of low concentration eddies and swirls
osmotic pressure the back pressure which stops the viscosity the friction in a fluid, defined in terms of the
osmotic process if one solution is pure water friction between layers
Poiseuille’s law the rate of laminar flow of an viscous drag a resistance force exerted on a moving
incompressible fluid in a tube:Q= (P −P)πr4/8ηl object, with a nontrivial dependence on velocity
2 1
Section Summary
12.1Flow Rate and Its Relation to Velocity
• Flow rate is defined to be the volume flowing • Bernoulli’s principle is Bernoulli’s equation applied
past a point in time , or where is to situations in which depth is constant. The terms
volume and is time. involving depth (or heighth) subtract out, yielding
• The SI unit of volume is .
• Another common unit is the liter (L), which is
. • Bernoulli’s principle has many applications,
• Flow rate and velocity are related by including entrainment, wings and sails, and
where is the cross-sectional area of the flow and velocity measurement.
is its average velocity.
12.3The Most General Applications of
• For incompressible fluids, flow rate at various
Bernoulli’s Equation
points is constant. That is,
• Power in fluid flow is given by the equation
where the first
term is power associated with pressure, the
second is power associated with velocity, and the
12.2Bernoulli’s Equation
third is power associated with height.
• Bernoulli’s equation states that the sum on each
12.4Viscosity and Laminar Flow;
side of the following equation is constant, or the
Poiseuille’s Law
same at any two points in an incompressible
frictionless fluid: • Laminar flow is characterized by smooth flow of
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 537
12 • Conceptual Questions 519
the fluid in layers that do not mix. 12.6Motion of an Object in a Viscous Fluid
• Turbulence is characterized by eddies and swirls
• When an object moves in a fluid, there is a
that mix layers of fluid together.
different form of the Reynolds number
• Fluid viscosity is due to friction within a fluid.
which indicates
Representative values are given inTable 12.1.
Viscosity has units of or . whether flow is laminar or turbulent.
• Flow is proportional to pressure difference and • For less than about one, flow is laminar.
inversely proportional to resistance: • For greater than , flow is entirely
turbulent.
• For laminar flow in a tube, Poiseuille’s law for 12.7Molecular Transport Phenomena:
resistance states that Diffusion, Osmosis, and Related Processes
• Diffusion is the movement of substances due to
random thermal molecular motion.
• Poiseuille’s law for flow in a tube is
• The average distance a molecule travels by
diffusion in a given amount of time is given by
• The pressure drop caused by flow and resistance
where is the diffusion constant, representative
is given by
values of which are found inTable 12.2.
• Osmosis is the transport of water through a
12.5The Onset of Turbulence
semipermeable membrane from a region of high
• The Reynolds number can reveal whether flow concentration to a region of low concentration.
is laminar or turbulent. It is • Dialysis is the transport of any other molecule
through a semipermeable membrane due to its
concentration difference.
• For below about 2000, flow is laminar. For • Both processes can be reversed by back pressure.
above about 3000, flow is turbulent. For values of • Active transport is a process in which a living
between 2000 and 3000, it may be either or membrane expends energy to move substances
both. across it.
Conceptual Questions
12.1Flow Rate and Its Relation to Velocity 5. Water is shot nearly vertically upward in a
decorative fountain and the stream is observed to
1. What is the difference between flow rate and fluid
broaden as it rises. Conversely, a stream of water
velocity? How are they related?
falling straight down from a faucet narrows. Explain
2. Many figures in the text show streamlines. Explain
why, and discuss whether surface tension enhances
why fluid velocity is greatest where streamlines are
or reduces the effect in each case.
closest together. (Hint: Consider the relationship
6. Look back toFigure 12.4. Answer the following two
between fluid velocity and the cross-sectional area
questions. Why is less than atmospheric? Why is
through which it flows.)
greater than ?
3. Identify some substances that are incompressible
7. Give an example of entrainment not mentioned in
and some that are not.
the text.
8. Many entrainment devices have a constriction,
12.2Bernoulli’s Equation
called a Venturi, such as shown inFigure 12.24.
4. You can squirt water a considerably greater How does this bolster entrainment?
distance by placing your thumb over the end of a
garden hose and then releasing, than by leaving it
completely uncovered. Explain how this works.
PAGE: 538
520 12 • Conceptual Questions
16. A perfume bottle or atomizer sprays a fluid that is
in the bottle. (Figure 12.25.) How does the fluid
rise up in the vertical tube in the bottle?
FIGURE12.24A tube with a narrow segment designed to enhance
entrainment is called a Venturi. These are very commonly used in
carburetors and aspirators.
9. Some chimney pipes have a T-shape, with a
crosspiece on top that helps draw up gases
whenever there is even a slight breeze. Explain how
this works in terms of Bernoulli’s principle.
10. Is there a limit to the height to which an
entrainment device can raise a fluid? Explain your
FIGURE12.25Atomizer: perfume bottle with tube to carry
answer.
perfume up through the bottle. (credit: Antonia Foy, Flickr)
11. Why is it preferable for airplanes to take off into
the wind rather than with the wind? 17. If you lower the window on a car while moving, an
12. Roofs are sometimes pushed off vertically during a empty plastic bag can sometimes fly out the
tropical cyclone, and buildings sometimes explode window. Why does this happen?
outward when hit by a tornado. Use Bernoulli’s
12.3The Most General Applications of
principle to explain these phenomena.
13. Why does a sailboat need a keel? Bernoulli’s Equation
14. It is dangerous to stand close to railroad tracks
18. Based on Bernoulli’s equation, what are three
when a rapidly moving commuter train passes.
forms of energy in a fluid? (Note that these forms
Explain why atmospheric pressure would push
are conservative, unlike heat transfer and other
you toward the moving train.
dissipative forms not included in Bernoulli’s
15. Water pressure inside a hose nozzle can be less
equation.)
than atmospheric pressure due to the Bernoulli
19. Water that has emerged from a hose into the
effect. Explain in terms of energy how the water
atmosphere has a gauge pressure of zero. Why?
can emerge from the nozzle against the opposing
When you put your hand in front of the emerging
atmospheric pressure.
stream you feel a force, yet the water’s gauge
pressure is zero. Explain where the force comes
from in terms of energy.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 539
12 • Conceptual Questions 521
20. The old rubber boot shown inFigure 12.26has two 25. Plumbing usually includes air-filled tubes near water
leaks. To what maximum height can the water squirt faucets, as shown inFigure 12.27. Explain why they are
from Leak 1? How does the velocity of water emerging needed and how they work.
from Leak 2 differ from that of leak 1? Explain your
responses in terms of energy.
FIGURE12.26Water emerges from two leaks in an old boot.
FIGURE12.27The vertical tube near the water tap remains full of
21. Water pressure inside a hose nozzle can be less air and serves a useful purpose.
than atmospheric pressure due to the Bernoulli
effect. Explain in terms of energy how the water 12.5The Onset of Turbulence
can emerge from the nozzle against the opposing
26. Doppler ultrasound can be used to measure the
atmospheric pressure.
speed of blood in the body. If there is a partial
constriction of an artery, where would you expect
12.4Viscosity and Laminar Flow;
blood speed to be greatest, at or nearby the
Poiseuille’s Law
constriction? What are the two distinct causes of
22. Explain why the viscosity of a liquid decreases higher resistance in the constriction?
with temperature—that is, how might increased 27. Sink drains often have a device such as that shown in
temperature reduce the effects of cohesive forces Figure 12.28to help speed the flow of water. How does
in a liquid? Also explain why the viscosity of a gas this work?
increases with temperature—that is, how does
increased gas temperature create more collisions
between atoms and molecules?
23. When paddling a canoe upstream, it is wisest to
travel as near to the shore as possible. When
canoeing downstream, it may be best to stay near
the middle. Explain why.
24. Why does flow decrease in your shower when
someone flushes the toilet?
FIGURE12.28You will find devices such as this in many drains.
They significantly increase flow rate.
28. Some ceiling fans have decorative wicker reeds on
their blades. Discuss whether these fans are as
quiet and efficient as those with smooth blades.
12.6Motion of an Object in a Viscous Fluid
29. What direction will a helium balloon move inside a
car that is slowing down—toward the front or
back? Explain your answer.
PAGE: 540
522 12 • Problems & Exercises
30. Will identical raindrops fall more rapidly in air 12.7Molecular Transport Phenomena:
or air, neglecting any differences in air Diffusion, Osmosis, and Related Processes
density? Explain your answer.
32. Why would you expect the rate of diffusion to
31. If you took two marbles of different sizes, what
increase with temperature? Can you give an
would you expect to observe about the relative
example, such as the fact that you can dissolve
magnitudes of their terminal velocities?
sugar more rapidly in hot water?
33. How are osmosis and dialysis similar? How do
they differ?
Problems & Exercises
12.1Flow Rate and Its Relation to Velocity 7. (a) As blood passes through the capillary bed in an
organ, the capillaries join to form venules (small
1. What is the average flow rate in of gasoline
veins). If the blood speed increases by a factor of
to the engine of a car traveling at 100 km/h if it
4.00 and the total cross-sectional area of the
averages 10.0 km/L?
venules is , what is the total cross-
2. The heart of a resting adult pumps blood at a rate of
sectional area of the capillaries feeding these
5.00 L/min. (a) Convert this to . (b) What is
venules? (b) How many capillaries are involved if
this rate in ?
their average diameter is ?
3. Blood is pumped from the heart at a rate of 5.0 L/
8. The human circulation system has approximately
min into the aorta (of radius 1.0 cm). Determine the
capillary vessels. Each vessel has a
speed of blood through the aorta.
diameter of about . Assuming cardiac output
4. Blood is flowing through an artery of radius 2 mm at
is 5L/min, determine the average velocity of blood
a rate of 40 cm/s. Determine the flow rate and the
flow through each capillary vessel.
volume that passes through the artery in a period of
9. (a) Estimate the time it would take to fill a private
30 s.
swimming pool with a capacity of 80,000 L using a
5. The Huka Falls on the Waikato River is one of New
garden hose delivering 60 L/min. (b) How long
Zealand’s most visited natural tourist attractions
would it take to fill if you could divert a moderate
(seeFigure 12.29). On average the river has a flow
size river, flowing at , into it?
rate of about 300,000 L/s. At the gorge, the river
10. The flow rate of blood through a
narrows to 20 m wide and averages 20 m deep. (a)
-radius capillary is . (a) What is
What is the average speed of the river in the gorge?
the speed of the blood flow? (This small speed
(b) What is the average speed of the water in the
allows time for diffusion of materials to and from
river downstream of the falls when it widens to 60
the blood.) (b) Assuming all the blood in the body
m and its depth increases to an average of 40 m?
passes through capillaries, how many of them
must there be to carry a total flow of ?
(The large number obtained is an overestimate,
but it is still reasonable.)
11. (a) What is the fluid speed in a fire hose with a
9.00-cm diameter carrying 80.0 L of water per
second? (b) What is the flow rate in cubic meters
per second? (c) Would your answers be different if
salt water replaced the fresh water in the fire
hose?
12. The main uptake air duct of a forced air gas heater
is 0.300 m in diameter. What is the average speed
FIGURE12.29The Huka Falls in Taupo, New Zealand, of air in the duct if it carries a volume equal to that
demonstrate flow rate. (credit: RaviGogna, Flickr) of the house’s interior every 15 min? The inside
6. A major artery with a cross-sectional area of volume of the house is equivalent to a rectangular
solid 13.0 m wide by 20.0 m long by 2.75 m high.
branches into 18 smaller arteries, each
with an average cross-sectional area of .
By what factor is the average velocity of the blood
reduced when it passes into these branches?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 541
12 • Problems & Exercises 523
13. Water is moving at a velocity of 2.00 m/s through a 21. Every few years, winds in Boulder, Colorado, attain
hose with an internal diameter of 1.60 cm. (a) sustained speeds of 45.0 m/s (about 100 mi/h)
What is the flow rate in liters per second? (b) The when the jet stream descends during early spring.
fluid velocity in this hose’s nozzle is 15.0 m/s. Approximately what is the force due to the
What is the nozzle’s inside diameter? Bernoulli effect on a roof having an area of
14. Prove that the speed of an incompressible fluid ? Typical air density in Boulder is
through a constriction, such as in a Venturi tube, , and the corresponding atmospheric
increases by a factor equal to the square of the pressure is . (Bernoulli’s
factor by which the diameter decreases. (The principle as stated in the text assumes laminar
converse applies for flow out of a constriction into flow. Using the principle here produces only an
a larger-diameter region.) approximate result, because there is significant
15. Water emerges straight down from a faucet with a turbulence.)
1.80-cm diameter at a speed of 0.500 m/s. 22. (a) Calculate the approximate force on a square
(Because of the construction of the faucet, there is meter of sail, given the horizontal velocity of the
no variation in speed across the stream.) (a) What wind is 6.00 m/s parallel to its front surface and
is the flow rate in ? (b) What is the diameter 3.50 m/s along its back surface. Take the density
of the stream 0.200 m below the faucet? Neglect of air to be . (The calculation, based on
any effects due to surface tension. Bernoulli’s principle, is approximate due to the
16. Unreasonable Results effects of turbulence.) (b) Discuss whether this
A mountain stream is 10.0 m wide and averages force is great enough to be effective for propelling
2.00 m in depth. During the spring runoff, the flow a sailboat.
in the stream reaches . (a) What is 23. (a) What is the pressure drop due to the Bernoulli
the average velocity of the stream under these effect as water goes into a 3.00-cm-diameter
conditions? (b) What is unreasonable about this nozzle from a 9.00-cm-diameter fire hose while
velocity? (c) What is unreasonable or inconsistent carrying a flow of 40.0 L/s? (b) To what maximum
about the premises? height above the nozzle can this water rise? (The
actual height will be significantly smaller due to air
12.2Bernoulli’s Equation resistance.)
24. (a) Using Bernoulli’s equation, show that the
17. Verify that pressure has units of energy per unit
measured fluid speed for a pitot tube, like the
volume.
18. Suppose you have a wind speed gauge like the one inFigure 12.7(b), is given by
pitot tube shown inExample 12.2(b). By what
where is the height of the manometer fluid, is
factor must wind speed increase to double the
the density of the manometer fluid, is the
value of in the manometer? Is this independent
density of the moving fluid, and is the
of the moving fluid and the fluid in the
acceleration due to gravity. (Note that is indeed
manometer?
proportional to the square root of , as stated in
19. If the pressure reading of your pitot tube is 15.0
the text.) (b) Calculate for moving air if a
mm Hg at a speed of 200 km/h, what will it be at
mercury manometer’s is 0.200 m.
700 km/h at the same altitude?
20. Calculate the maximum height to which water
12.3The Most General Applications of
could be squirted with the hose inExample 12.2
Bernoulli’s Equation
example if it: (a) Emerges from the nozzle. (b)
Emerges with the nozzle removed, assuming the 25. Hoover Dam on the Colorado River is the highest
same flow rate. dam in the United States at 221 m, with an output
of 1300 MW. The dam generates electricity with
water taken from a depth of 150 m and an average
flow rate of . (a) Calculate the power in
this flow. (b) What is the ratio of this power to the
facility’s average of 680 MW?
PAGE: 542
524 12 • Problems & Exercises
26. A frequently quoted rule of thumb in aircraft 31. A glucose solution being administered with an IV
design is that wings should produce about 1000 N has a flow rate of . What will the
of lift per square meter of wing. (The fact that a new flow rate be if the glucose is replaced by
wing has a top and bottom surface does not whole blood having the same density but a
double its area.) (a) At takeoff, an aircraft travels viscosity 2.50 times that of the glucose? All other
at 60.0 m/s, so that the air speed relative to the factors remain constant.
bottom of the wing is 60.0 m/s. Given the sea level 32. The pressure drop along a length of artery is 100
density of air to be , how fast must it Pa, the radius is 10 mm, and the flow is laminar.
move over the upper surface to create the ideal The average speed of the blood is 15 mm/s. (a)
lift? (b) How fast must air move over the upper What is the net force on the blood in this section
surface at a cruising speed of 245 m/s and at an of artery? (b) What is the power expended
altitude where air density is one-fourth that at sea maintaining the flow?
level? (Note that this is not all of the aircraft’s 33. A small artery has a length of and a
lift—some comes from the body of the plane, some radius of . If the pressure drop
from engine thrust, and so on. Furthermore, across the artery is 1.3kPa, what is the flow rate
Bernoulli’s principle gives an approximate answer through the artery? (Assume that the temperature
because flow over the wing creates turbulence.) is .)
27. The left ventricle of a resting adult’s heart pumps 34. Fluid originally flows through a tube at a rate of
blood at a flow rate of , increasing its . To illustrate the sensitivity of flow rate
pressure by 110 mm Hg, its speed from zero to to various factors, calculate the new flow rate for
30.0 cm/s, and its height by 5.00 cm. (All numbers the following changes with all other factors
are averaged over the entire heartbeat.) Calculate remaining the same as in the original conditions.
the total power output of the left ventricle. Note (a) Pressure difference increases by a factor of
that most of the power is used to increase blood 1.50. (b) A new fluid with 3.00 times greater
pressure. viscosity is substituted. (c) The tube is replaced by
28. A sump pump (used to drain water from the one having 4.00 times the length. (d) Another tube
basement of houses built below the water table) is is used with a radius 0.100 times the original. (e)
draining a flooded basement at the rate of 0.750 Yet another tube is substituted with a radius 0.100
L/s, with an output pressure of . times the original and half the length,andthe
(a) The water enters a hose with a 3.00-cm inside pressure difference is increased by a factor of
diameter and rises 2.50 m above the pump. What 1.50.
is its pressure at this point? (b) The hose goes over 35. The arterioles (small arteries) leading to an organ,
the foundation wall, losing 0.500 m in height, and constrict in order to decrease flow to the organ. To
widens to 4.00 cm in diameter. What is the shut down an organ, blood flow is reduced
pressure now? You may neglect frictional losses in naturally to 1.00% of its original value. By what
both parts of the problem. factor did the radii of the arterioles constrict?
Penguins do this when they stand on ice to reduce
12.4Viscosity and Laminar Flow; the blood flow to their feet.
Poiseuille’s Law 36. Angioplasty is a technique in which arteries
partially blocked with plaque are dilated to
29. (a) Calculate the retarding force due to the
increase blood flow. By what factor must the
viscosity of the air layer between a cart and a level
radius of an artery be increased in order to
air track given the following information—air
increase blood flow by a factor of 10?
temperature is , the cart is moving at 0.400
37. (a) Suppose a blood vessel’s radius is decreased
m/s, its surface area is , and the
to 90.0% of its original value by plaque deposits
thickness of the air layer is . (b)
and the body compensates by increasing the
What is the ratio of this force to the weight of the
pressure difference along the vessel to keep the
0.300-kg cart?
flow rate constant. By what factor must the
30. What force is needed to pull one microscope slide
pressure difference increase? (b) If turbulence is
over another at a speed of 1.00 cm/s, if there is a
created by the obstruction, what additional effect
0.500-mm-thick layer of water between
would it have on the flow rate?
them and the contact area is ?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 543
12 • Problems & Exercises 525
38. A spherical particle falling at a terminal speed in a 45. During a marathon race, a runner’s blood flow
liquid must have the gravitational force balanced increases to 10.0 times her resting rate. Her
by the drag force and the buoyant force. The blood’s viscosity has dropped to 95.0% of its
buoyant force is equal to the weight of the normal value, and the blood pressure difference
displaced fluid, while the drag force is assumed to across the circulatory system has increased by
be given by Stokes Law, . Show that 50.0%. By what factor has the average radii of her
the terminal speed is given by blood vessels increased?
46. Water supplied to a house by a water main has a
where is the radius of the
pressure of early on a summer
sphere, is its density, and is the density of
day when neighborhood use is low. This pressure
the fluid and the coefficient of viscosity.
produces a flow of 20.0 L/min through a garden
39. Using the equation of the previous problem, find
hose. Later in the day, pressure at the exit of the
the viscosity of motor oil in which a steel ball of
water main and entrance to the house drops, and
radius 0.8 mm falls with a terminal speed of 4.32
a flow of only 8.00 L/min is obtained through the
cm/s. The densities of the ball and the oil are 7.86
same hose. (a) What pressure is now being
and 0.88 g/mL, respectively.
supplied to the house, assuming resistance is
40. A skydiver will reach a terminal velocity when the
constant? (b) By what factor did the flow rate in
air drag equals their weight. For a skydiver with
the water main increase in order to cause this
high speed and a large body, turbulence is a factor.
decrease in delivered pressure? The pressure at
The drag force then is approximately proportional
the entrance of the water main is
to the square of the velocity. Taking the drag force
, and the original flow rate was
to be and setting this equal to the
200 L/min. (c) How many more users are there,
person’s weight, find the terminal speed for a assuming each would consume 20.0 L/min in the
person falling “spread eagle.” Find both a formula morning?
and a number for , with assumptions as to size. 47. An oil gusher shoots crude oil 25.0 m into the air
41. A layer of oil 1.50 mm thick is placed between two through a pipe with a 0.100-m diameter.
microscope slides. Researchers find that a force of Neglecting air resistance but not the resistance of
is required to glide one over the the pipe, and assuming laminar flow, calculate the
other at a speed of 1.00 cm/s when their contact gauge pressure at the entrance of the 50.0-m-long
area is . What is the oil’s viscosity? What vertical pipe. Take the density of the oil to be
type of oil might it be? and its viscosity to be
42. (a) Verify that a 19.0% decrease in laminar flow (or ). Note that you must take into
through a tube is caused by a 5.00% decrease in account the pressure due to the 50.0-m column of
radius, assuming that all other factors remain oil in the pipe.
constant, as stated in the text. (b) What increase 48. Concrete is pumped from a cement mixer to the
in flow is obtained from a 5.00% increase in place it is being laid, instead of being carried in
radius, again assuming all other factors remain wheelbarrows. The flow rate is 200.0 L/min
constant? through a 50.0-m-long, 8.00-cm-diameter hose,
43. Example 12.8dealt with the flow of saline solution and the pressure at the pump is
in an IV system. (a) Verify that a pressure of . (a) Calculate the resistance of
is created at a depth of 1.61 m the hose. (b) What is the viscosity of the concrete,
in a saline solution, assuming its density to be that assuming the flow is laminar? (c) How much
of sea water. (b) Calculate the new flow rate if the power is being supplied, assuming the point of use
height of the saline solution is decreased to 1.50 is at the same level as the pump? You may neglect
m. (c) At what height would the direction of flow the power supplied to increase the concrete’s
be reversed? (This reversal can be a problem velocity.
when patients stand up.) 49. Construct Your Own Problem
44. When physicians diagnose arterial blockages, they Consider a coronary artery constricted by
quote the reduction in flow rate. If the flow rate in arteriosclerosis. Construct a problem in which you
an artery has been reduced to 10.0% of its normal calculate the amount by which the diameter of the
value by a blood clot and the average pressure artery is decreased, based on an assessment of
difference has increased by 20.0%, by what factor the decrease in flow rate.
has the clot reduced the radius of the artery?
PAGE: 544
526 12 • Problems & Exercises
50. Consider a river that spreads out in a delta region 58. InTake-Home Experiment: Inhalation, we
on its way to the sea. Construct a problem in measured the average flow rate of air traveling
which you calculate the average speed at which through the trachea during each inhalation. Now
water moves in the delta region, based on the calculate the average air speed in meters per
speed at which it was moving up river. Among the second through your trachea during each
things to consider are the size and flow rate of the inhalation. The radius of the trachea in adult
river before it spreads out and its size once it has humans is approximately . From the data
spread out. You can construct the problem for the above, calculate the Reynolds number for the air
river spreading out into one large river or into flow in the trachea during inhalation. Do you
multiple smaller rivers. expect the air flow to be laminar or turbulent?
59. Gasoline is piped underground from refineries to
12.5The Onset of Turbulence major users. The flow rate is
(about 500 gal/min), the viscosity of gasoline is
51. Verify that the flow of oil is laminar (barely) for an
, and its density is
oil gusher that shoots crude oil 25.0 m into the air
. (a) What minimum diameter must the
through a pipe with a 0.100-m diameter. The
pipe have if the Reynolds number is to be less
vertical pipe is 50 m long. Take the density of the
than 2000? (b) What pressure difference must be
oil to be and its viscosity to be
maintained along each kilometer of the pipe to
(or ).
maintain this flow rate?
52. Show that the Reynolds number is unitless by
60. Assuming that blood is an ideal fluid, calculate the
substituting units for all the quantities in its
critical flow rate at which turbulence is a certainty
definition and cancelling.
in the aorta. Take the diameter of the aorta to be
53. Calculate the Reynolds numbers for the flow of
2.50 cm. (Turbulence will actually occur at lower
water through (a) a nozzle with a radius of 0.250
average flow rates, because blood is not an ideal
cm and (b) a garden hose with a radius of 0.900
fluid. Furthermore, since blood flow pulses,
cm, when the nozzle is attached to the hose. The
turbulence may occur during only the high-
flow rate through hose and nozzle is 0.500 L/s.
velocity part of each heartbeat.)
Can the flow in either possibly be laminar?
61. Unreasonable Results
54. A fire hose has an inside diameter of 6.40 cm.
A fairly large garden hose has an internal radius of
Suppose such a hose carries a flow of 40.0 L/s
0.600 cm and a length of 23.0 m. The nozzleless
starting at a gauge pressure of .
horizontal hose is attached to a faucet, and it
The hose goes 10.0 m up a ladder to a nozzle
delivers 50.0 L/s. (a) What water pressure is
having an inside diameter of 3.00 cm. Calculate
supplied by the faucet? (b) What is unreasonable
the Reynolds numbers for flow in the fire hose and
about this pressure? (c) What is unreasonable
nozzle to show that the flow in each must be
about the premise? (d) What is the Reynolds
turbulent.
number for the given flow? (Take the viscosity of
55. Concrete is pumped from a cement mixer to the
water as .)
place it is being laid, instead of being carried in
wheelbarrows. The flow rate is 200.0 L/min
12.7Molecular Transport Phenomena:
through a 50.0-m-long, 8.00-cm-diameter hose,
Diffusion, Osmosis, and Related Processes
and the pressure at the pump is
. Verify that the flow of concrete 62. You can smell perfume very shortly after opening
is laminar taking concrete’s viscosity to be the bottle. To show that it is not reaching your
, and given its density is nose by diffusion, calculate the average distance a
. perfume molecule moves in one second in air,
56. At what flow rate might turbulence begin to given its diffusion constant to be
develop in a water main with a 0.200-m diameter? .
Assume a temperature. 63. What is the ratio of the average distances that
57. What is the greatest average speed of blood flow oxygen will diffuse in a given time in air and water?
at in an artery of radius 2.00mm if the flow Why is this distance less in water (equivalently,
is to remain laminar? What is the corresponding why is less in water)?
flow rate? Take the density of blood to be
.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 545
12 • Problems & Exercises 527
64. Oxygen reaches the veinless cornea of the eye by 66. Suppose hydrogen and oxygen are diffusing
diffusing through its tear layer, which is 0.500-mm through air. A small amount of each is released
thick. How long does it take the average oxygen simultaneously. How much time passes before the
molecule to do this? hydrogen is 1.00 s ahead of the oxygen? Such
65. (a) Find the average time required for an oxygen differences in arrival times are used as an
molecule to diffuse through a 0.200-mm-thick analytical tool in gas chromatography.
tear layer on the cornea. (b) How much time is
required to diffuse of oxygen to the
cornea if its surface area is ?
PAGE: 546
528 12 • Problems & Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 547
CHAPTER 13
Temperature, Kinetic Theory, and the Gas Laws
FIGURE13.1Molecules dissolved in surfaces undergo a process of outgassing, or release into the space around them. In a car, this leads to
the famous "new car smell." In precision instruments like telescopes, this leads to major distortions due to contamination. NASA engineer
Nithin Abraham created a coating to absorb these contaminants. Here she is pictured securing a coated panel beneath the Johnson Space
Center's Chamber A, where it was used during testing of the James Webb Space Telescope. (credit: NASA, Chris Gunn/Flickr)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
13.1Temperature
13.2Thermal Expansion of Solids and Liquids
13.3The Ideal Gas Law
13.4Kinetic Theory: Atomic and Molecular Explanation of Pressure and Temperature
13.5Phase Changes
13.6Humidity, Evaporation, and Boiling
INTRODUCTION TO TEMPERATURE, KINETIC THEORY, AND THE GAS LAWS Heat is something familiar to each
of us. We feel the warmth of the summer Sun, the chill of a clear summer night, the heat of coffee after a winter
stroll, and the cooling effect of our sweat. Heat transfer is maintained by temperature differences. Manifestations of
heat transfer—the movement of heat energy from one place or material to another—are apparent throughout the
universe. Heat from beneath Earth’s surface is brought to the surface in flows of incandescent lava. The Sun warms
Earth’s surface and is the source of much of the energy we find on it. Rising levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide
threaten to trap more of the Sun’s energy, perhaps fundamentally altering the ecosphere. In space, supernovas
explode, briefly radiating more heat than an entire galaxy does.
What is heat? How do we define it? How is it related to temperature? What are heat’s effects? How is it related to
other forms of energy and to work? We will find that, in spite of the richness of the phenomena, there is a small set
of underlying physical principles that unite the subjects and tie them to other fields.
PAGE: 548
530 13 • Temperature, Kinetic Theory, and the Gas Laws
FIGURE13.2In a typical thermometer like this one, the alcohol, with a red dye, expands more rapidly than the glass containing it. When
the thermometer’s temperature increases, the liquid from the bulb is forced into the narrow tube, producing a large change in the length of
the column for a small change in temperature. (credit: Chemical Engineer, Wikimedia Commons)
13.1 Temperature
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define temperature.
• Convert temperatures between the Celsius, Fahrenheit, and Kelvin scales.
• Define thermal equilibrium.
• State the zeroth law of thermodynamics.
The concept of temperature has evolved from the common concepts of hot and cold. Human perception of what
feels hot or cold is a relative one. For example, if you place one hand in hot water and the other in cold water, and
then place both hands in tepid water, the tepid water will feel cool to the hand that was in hot water, and warm to
the one that was in cold water. The scientific definition of temperature is less ambiguous than your senses of hot
and cold.Temperatureis operationally defined to be what we measure with a thermometer. (Many physical
quantities are defined solely in terms of how they are measured. We shall see later how temperature is related to
the kinetic energies of atoms and molecules, a more physical explanation.) Two accurate thermometers, one placed
in hot water and the other in cold water, will show the hot water to have a higher temperature. If they are then
placed in the tepid water, both will give identical readings (within measurement uncertainties). In this section, we
discuss temperature, its measurement by thermometers, and its relationship to thermal equilibrium. Again,
temperature is the quantity measured by a thermometer.
Misconception Alert: Human Perception vs. Reality
On a cold winter morning, the wood on a porch feels warmer than the metal of your bike. The wood and bicycle
are in thermal equilibrium with the outside air, and are thus the same temperature. Theyfeeldifferent because
of the difference in the way that they conduct heat away from your skin. The metal conducts heat away from
your body faster than the wood does (see more about conductivity inConduction). This is just one example
demonstrating that the human sense of hot and cold is not determined by temperature alone.
Another factor that affects our perception of temperature is humidity. Most people feel much hotter on hot,
humid days than on hot, dry days. This is because on humid days, sweat does not evaporate from the skin as
efficiently as it does on dry days. It is the evaporation of sweat (or water from a sprinkler or pool) that cools us
off.
Any physical property that depends on temperature, and whose response to temperature is reproducible, can be
used as the basis of a thermometer. Because many physical properties depend on temperature, the variety of
thermometers is remarkable. For example, volume increases with temperature for most substances. This property is
the basis for the common alcohol thermometer, the old mercury thermometer, and the bimetallic strip (Figure 13.3).
Other properties used to measure temperature include electrical resistance and color, as shown inFigure 13.4, and
the emission of infrared radiation, as shown inFigure 13.5.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 549
13.1 • Temperature 531
FIGURE13.3The curvature of a bimetallic strip depends on temperature. (a) The strip is straight at the starting temperature, where its two
components have the same length. (b) At a higher temperature, this strip bends to the right, because the metal on the left has expanded
more than the metal on the right.
FIGURE13.4Each of the six squares on this plastic (liquid crystal) thermometer contains a film of a different heat-sensitive liquid crystal
material. Below , all six squares are black. When the plastic thermometer is exposed to temperature that increases to , the first
liquid crystal square changes color. When the temperature increases above the second liquid crystal square also changes color, and
so forth. (credit: Arkrishna, Wikimedia Commons)
FIGURE13.5Fireman Jason Ormand uses a pyrometer to check the temperature of an aircraft carrier’s ventilation system. Infrared
radiation (whose emission varies with temperature) from the vent is measured and a temperature readout is quickly produced. Infrared
measurements are also frequently used as a measure of body temperature. These modern thermometers, placed in the ear canal, are more
accurate than alcohol thermometers placed under the tongue or in the armpit. (credit: Lamel J. Hinton/U.S. Navy)
Temperature Scales
Thermometers are used to measure temperature according to well-defined scales of measurement, which use pre-
defined reference points to help compare quantities. The three most common temperature scales are the
Fahrenheit, Celsius, and Kelvin scales. A temperature scale can be created by identifying two easily reproducible
temperatures. The freezing and boiling temperatures of water at standard atmospheric pressure are commonly
used.
TheCelsiusscale (which replaced the slightly differentcentigradescale) has the freezing point of water at and
the boiling point at . Its unit is thedegree Celsius . On theFahrenheitscale (still the most frequently used
in the United States), the freezing point of water is at and the boiling point is at . The unit of temperature
PAGE: 550
532 13 • Temperature, Kinetic Theory, and the Gas Laws
on this scale is thedegree Fahrenheit . Note that a temperature difference of one degree Celsius is greater than
a temperature difference of one degree Fahrenheit. Only 100 Celsius degrees span the same range as 180
Fahrenheit degrees, thus one degree on the Celsius scale is 1.8 times larger than one degree on the Fahrenheit scale
TheKelvinscale is the temperature scale that is commonly used in science. It is anabsolute temperaturescale
defined to have 0 K at the lowest possible temperature, calledabsolute zero. The official temperature unit on this
scale is thekelvin, which is abbreviated K, and is not accompanied by a degree sign. The freezing and boiling points
of water are 273.15 K and 373.15 K, respectively. Thus, the magnitude of temperature differences is the same in
units of kelvins and degrees Celsius. Unlike other temperature scales, the Kelvin scale is an absolute scale. It is used
extensively in scientific work because a number of physical quantities, such as the volume of an ideal gas, are
directly related to absolute temperature. The kelvin is the SI unit used in scientific work.
FIGURE13.6Relationships between the Fahrenheit, Celsius, and Kelvin temperature scales, rounded to the nearest degree. The relative
sizes of the scales are also shown.
The relationships between the three common temperature scales is shown inFigure 13.6. Temperatures on these
scales can be converted using the equations inTable 13.1.
To convert from . . . Use this equation . . . Also written as . . .
Celsius to Fahrenheit
Fahrenheit to Celsius
Celsius to Kelvin
Kelvin to Celsius
Fahrenheit to Kelvin
Kelvin to Fahrenheit
TABLE13.1Temperature Conversions
Notice that the conversions between Fahrenheit and Kelvin look quite complicated. In fact, they are simple
combinations of the conversions between Fahrenheit and Celsius, and the conversions between Celsius and Kelvin.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 551
13.1 • Temperature 533
EXAMPLE 13.1
Converting between Temperature Scales: Room Temperature
“Room temperature” is generally defined to be . (a) What is room temperature in ? (b) What is it in K?
Strategy
To answer these questions, all we need to do is choose the correct conversion equations and plug in the known
values.
Solution for (a)
1. Choose the right equation. To convert from to , use the equation
13.1
2. Plug the known value into the equation and solve:
13.2
Solution for (b)
1. Choose the right equation. To convert from to K, use the equation
13.3
2. Plug the known value into the equation and solve:
13.4
EXAMPLE 13.2
Converting between Temperature Scales: the Reaumur Scale
The Reaumur scale is a temperature scale that was used widely in Europe in the 18th and 19th centuries. On the
Reaumur temperature scale, the freezing point of water is and the boiling temperature is . If “room
temperature” is on the Celsius scale, what is it on the Reaumur scale?
Strategy
To answer this question, we must compare the Reaumur scale to the Celsius scale. The difference between the
freezing point and boiling point of water on the Reaumur scale is . On the Celsius scale it is . Therefore
. Both scales start at for freezing, so we can derive a simple formula to convert between
temperatures on the two scales.
Solution
1. Derive a formula to convert from one scale to the other:
13.5
2. Plug the known value into the equation and solve:
13.6
Temperature Ranges in the Universe
Figure 13.8shows the wide range of temperatures found in the universe. Human beings have been known to survive
PAGE: 552
534 13 • Temperature, Kinetic Theory, and the Gas Laws
with body temperatures within a small range, from to to ). The average normal body
temperature is usually given as ( ), and variations in this temperature can indicate a medical condition:
a fever, an infection, a tumor, or circulatory problems (seeFigure 13.7).
FIGURE13.7This image of radiation from a person’s body (an infrared thermograph) shows the location of temperature abnormalities in
the upper body. Dark blue corresponds to cold areas and red to white corresponds to hot areas. An elevated temperature might be an
indication of malignant tissue (a cancerous tumor in the breast, for example), while a depressed temperature might be due to a decline in
blood flow from a clot. In this case, the abnormalities are caused by a condition called hyperhidrosis. (credit: Porcelina81, Wikimedia
Commons)
The lowest temperatures ever recorded have been measured during laboratory experiments: at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (USA), and at Helsinki University of Technology (Finland). In
comparison, the coldest recorded place on Earth’s surface is Vostok, Antarctica at 183 K , and the coldest
place (outside the lab) known in the universe is the Boomerang Nebula, with a temperature of 1 K.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 553
13.1 • Temperature 535
FIGURE13.8Each increment on this logarithmic scale indicates an increase by a factor of ten, and thus illustrates the tremendous range of
temperatures in nature. Note that zero on a logarithmic scale would occur off the bottom of the page at infinity.
Making Connections: Absolute Zero
What is absolute zero? Absolute zero is the temperature at which all molecular motion has ceased. The concept
of absolute zero arises from the behavior of gases.Figure 13.9shows how the pressure of gases at a constant
volume decreases as temperature decreases. Various scientists have noted that the pressures of gases
extrapolate to zero at the same temperature, . This extrapolation implies that there is a lowest
temperature. This temperature is calledabsolute zero. Today we know that most gases first liquefy and then
freeze, and it is not actually possible to reach absolute zero. The numerical value of absolute zero temperature is
or 0 K.
PAGE: 554
536 13 • Temperature, Kinetic Theory, and the Gas Laws
FIGURE13.9Graph of pressure versus temperature for various gases kept at a constant volume. Note that all of the graphs extrapolate to
zero pressure at the same temperature.
Thermal Equilibrium and the Zeroth Law of Thermodynamics
Thermometers actually take theirowntemperature, not the temperature of the object they are measuring. This
raises the question of how we can be certain that a thermometer measures the temperature of the object with which
it is in contact. It is based on the fact that any two systems placed inthermal contact(meaning heat transfer can
occur between them) will reach the same temperature. That is, heat will flow from the hotter object to the cooler
one until they have exactly the same temperature. The objects are then inthermal equilibrium, and no further
changes will occur. The systems interact and change because their temperatures differ, and the changes stop once
their temperatures are the same. Thus, if enough time is allowed for this transfer of heat to run its course, the
temperature a thermometer registersdoesrepresent the system with which it is in thermal equilibrium. Thermal
equilibrium is established when two bodies are in contact with each other and can freely exchange energy.
Furthermore, experimentation has shown that if two systems, A and B, are in thermal equilibrium with each another,
and B is in thermal equilibrium with a third system C, then A is also in thermal equilibrium with C. This conclusion
may seem obvious, because all three have the same temperature, but it is basic to thermodynamics. It is called the
zeroth law of thermodynamics.
The Zeroth Law of Thermodynamics
If two systems, A and B, are in thermal equilibrium with each other, and B is in thermal equilibrium with a third
system, C, then A is also in thermal equilibrium with C.
This law was postulated in the 1930s, after the first and second laws of thermodynamics had been developed and
named. It is called thezeroth lawbecause it comes logically before the first and second laws (discussed in
Thermodynamics). Suppose, for example, a cold metal block and a hot metal block are both placed on a metal plate
at room temperature. Eventually the cold block and the plate will be in thermal equilibrium. In addition, the hot
block and the plate will be in thermal equilibrium. By the zeroth law, we can conclude that the cold block and the hot
block are also in thermal equilibrium.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Does the temperature of a body depend on its size?
Solution
No, the system can be divided into smaller parts each of which is at the same temperature. We say that the
temperature is anintensivequantity. Intensive quantities are independent of size.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 555
13.2 • Thermal Expansion of Solids and Liquids 537
13.2 Thermal Expansion of Solids and Liquids
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define and describe thermal expansion.
• Calculate the linear expansion of an object given its initial length, change in temperature, and coefficient
of linear expansion.
• Calculate the volume expansion of an object given its initial volume, change in temperature, and
coefficient of volume expansion.
• Calculate thermal stress on an object given its original volume, temperature change, volume change, and
bulk modulus.
FIGURE13.10Thermal expansion joints like these in the Auckland Harbour Bridge in New Zealand allow bridges to change length without
buckling. (credit: Ingolfson, Wikimedia Commons)
The expansion of alcohol in a thermometer is one of many commonly encountered examples ofthermal expansion,
the change in size or volume of a given mass with temperature. Hot air rises because its volume increases, which
causes the hot air’s density to be smaller than the density of surrounding air, causing a buoyant (upward) force on
the hot air. The same happens in all liquids and gases, driving natural heat transfer upwards in homes, oceans, and
weather systems. Solids also undergo thermal expansion. Railroad tracks and bridges, for example, have expansion
joints to allow them to freely expand and contract with temperature changes.
What are the basic properties of thermal expansion? First, thermal expansion is clearly related to temperature
change. The greater the temperature change, the more a bimetallic strip will bend. Second, it depends on the
material. In a thermometer, for example, the expansion of alcohol is much greater than the expansion of the glass
containing it.
What is the underlying cause of thermal expansion? As is discussed inKinetic Theory: Atomic and Molecular
Explanation of Pressure and Temperature, an increase in temperature implies an increase in the kinetic energy of
the individual atoms. In a solid, unlike in a gas, the atoms or molecules are closely packed together, but their kinetic
energy (in the form of small, rapid vibrations) pushes neighboring atoms or molecules apart from each other. This
neighbor-to-neighbor pushing results in a slightly greater distance, on average, between neighbors, and adds up to a
larger size for the whole body. For most substances under ordinary conditions, there is no preferred direction, and
an increase in temperature will increase the solid’s size by a certain fraction in each dimension.
Linear Thermal Expansion—Thermal Expansion in One Dimension
The change in length is proportional to length . The dependence of thermal expansion on temperature,
substance, and length is summarized in the equation
PAGE: 556
538 13 • Temperature, Kinetic Theory, and the Gas Laws
13.7
where is the change in length , is the change in temperature, and is thecoefficient of linear
expansion, which varies slightly with temperature.
Table 13.2lists representative values of the coefficient of linear expansion, which may have units of or 1/K.
Because the size of a kelvin and a degree Celsius are the same, both and can be expressed in units of kelvins
or degrees Celsius. The equation is accurate for small changes in temperature and can be used for
large changes in temperature if an average value of is used.
Coefficient of linear expansion Coefficient of volume expansion
Material
Solids
Aluminum
Brass
Copper
Gold
Iron or Steel
Invar (Nickel-iron alloy)
Lead
Silver
Glass (ordinary)
Glass (Pyrex®)
Quartz
Concrete, Brick
Marble (average)
Liquids
Ether
Ethyl alcohol
Petrol
TABLE13.2Thermal Expansion Coefficients at 1
1 Values for liquids and gases are approximate.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 557
13.2 • Thermal Expansion of Solids and Liquids 539
Coefficient of linear expansion Coefficient of volume expansion
Material
Glycerin
Mercury
Water
Gases
Air and most other gases at
atmospheric pressure
TABLE13.2Thermal Expansion Coefficients at 1
EXAMPLE 13.3
Calculating Linear Thermal Expansion: The Golden Gate Bridge
The main span of San Francisco’s Golden Gate Bridge is 1275 m long at its coldest. The bridge is exposed to
temperatures ranging from to . What is its change in length between these temperatures? Assume that
the bridge is made entirely of steel.
Strategy
Use the equation for linear thermal expansion to calculate the change in length , . Use the
coefficient of linear expansion, , for steel fromTable 13.2, and note that the change in temperature, , is .
Solution
Plug all of the known values into the equation to solve for .
13.8
Discussion
Although not large compared with the length of the bridge, this change in length is observable. It is generally spread
over many expansion joints so that the expansion at each joint is small.
Thermal Expansion in Two and Three Dimensions
Objects expand in all dimensions, as illustrated inFigure 13.11. That is, their areas and volumes, as well as their
lengths, increase with temperature. Holes also get larger with temperature. If you cut a hole in a metal plate, the
remaining material will expand exactly as it would if the plug was still in place. The plug would get bigger, and so the
hole must get bigger too. (Think of the ring of neighboring atoms or molecules on the wall of the hole as pushing
each other farther apart as temperature increases. Obviously, the ring of neighbors must get slightly larger, so the
hole gets slightly larger).
Thermal Expansion in Two Dimensions
For small temperature changes, the change in area is given by
13.9
PAGE: 558
540 13 • Temperature, Kinetic Theory, and the Gas Laws
where is the change in area , is the change in temperature, and is the coefficient of linear expansion,
which varies slightly with temperature.
FIGURE13.11In general, objects expand in all directions as temperature increases. In these drawings, the original boundaries of the
objects are shown with solid lines, and the expanded boundaries with dashed lines. (a) Area increases because both length and width
increase. The area of a circular plug also increases. (b) If the plug is removed, the hole it leaves becomes larger with increasing
temperature, just as if the expanding plug were still in place. (c) Volume also increases, because all three dimensions increase.
Thermal Expansion in Three Dimensions
The change in volume is very nearly . This equation is usually written as
13.10
where is thecoefficient of volume expansionand . Note that the values of inTable 13.2are almost
exactly equal to .
In general, objects will expand with increasing temperature. Water is the most important exception to this rule.
Water expands with increasing temperature (its densitydecreases) when it is at temperatures greater than
. However, it expands withdecreasingtemperature when it is between and to .
Water is densest at . (SeeFigure 13.12.) Perhaps the most striking effect of this phenomenon is the freezing of
water in a pond. When water near the surface cools down to it is denser than the remaining water and thus will
sink to the bottom. This “turnover” results in a layer of warmer water near the surface, which is then cooled.
Eventually the pond has a uniform temperature of . If the temperature in the surface layer drops below , the
water is less dense than the water below, and thus stays near the top. As a result, the pond surface can completely
freeze over. The ice on top of liquid water provides an insulating layer from winter’s harsh exterior air temperatures.
Fish and other aquatic life can survive in water beneath ice, due to this unusual characteristic of water. It also
produces circulation of water in the pond that is necessary for a healthy ecosystem of the body of water.
FIGURE13.12The density of water as a function of temperature. Note that the thermal expansion is actually very small. The maximum
density at is only0.0075%greater than the density at , and0.012%greater than that at .
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 559
13.2 • Thermal Expansion of Solids and Liquids 541
Making Connections: Real-World Connections—Filling the Tank
Differences in the thermal expansion of materials can lead to interesting effects at the gas station. One example
is the dripping of gasoline from a freshly filled tank on a hot day. Gasoline starts out at the temperature of the
ground under the gas station, which is cooler than the air temperature above. The gasoline cools the steel tank
when it is filled. Both gasoline and steel tank expand as they warm to air temperature, but gasoline expands
much more than steel, and so it may overflow.
This difference in expansion can also cause problems when interpreting the gasoline gauge. The actual amount
(mass) of gasoline left in the tank when the gauge hits “empty” is a lot less in the summer than in the winter. The
gasoline has the same volume as it does in the winter when the “add fuel” light goes on, but because the
gasoline has expanded, there is less mass. If you are used to getting another 40 miles on “empty” in the winter,
beware—you will probably run out much more quickly in the summer.
FIGURE13.13Because the gas expands more than the gas tank with increasing temperature, you can’t drive as many miles on
“empty” in the summer as you can in the winter. (credit: Hector Alejandro, Flickr)
EXAMPLE 13.4
Calculating Thermal Expansion: Gas vs. Gas Tank
Suppose your 60.0-L (15.9-gal) steel gasoline tank is full of gas, so both the tank and the gasoline have a
temperature of . How much gasoline has spilled by the time they warm to ?
Strategy
The tank and gasoline increase in volume, but the gasoline increases more, so the amount spilled is the difference in
their volume changes. (The gasoline tank can be treated as solid steel.) We can use the equation for volume
expansion to calculate the change in volume of the gasoline and of the tank.
Solution
1. Use the equation for volume expansion to calculate the increase in volume of the steel tank:
13.11
2. The increase in volume of the gasoline is given by this equation:
13.12
3. Find the difference in volume to determine the amount spilled as
13.13
Alternatively, we can combine these three equations into a single equation. (Note that the original volumes are
equal.)
PAGE: 560
542 13 • Temperature, Kinetic Theory, and the Gas Laws
13.14
Discussion
This amount is significant, particularly for a 60.0-L tank. The effect is so striking because the gasoline and steel
expand quickly. The rate of change in thermal properties is discussed inHeat and Heat Transfer Methods.
If you try to cap the tank tightly to prevent overflow, you will find that it leaks anyway, either around the cap or by
bursting the tank. Tightly constricting the expanding gas is equivalent to compressing it, and both liquids and solids
resist being compressed with extremely large forces. To avoid rupturing rigid containers, these containers have air
gaps, which allow them to expand and contract without stressing them.
Thermal Stress
Thermal stressis created by thermal expansion or contraction (seeElasticity: Stress and Strainfor a discussion of
stress and strain). Thermal stress can be destructive, such as when expanding gasoline ruptures a tank. It can also
be useful, for example, when two parts are joined together by heating one in manufacturing, then slipping it over the
other and allowing the combination to cool. Thermal stress can explain many phenomena, such as the weathering of
rocks and pavement by the expansion of ice when it freezes.
EXAMPLE 13.5
Calculating Thermal Stress: Gas Pressure
What pressure would be created in the gasoline tank considered inExample 13.4, if the gasoline increases in
temperature from to without being allowed to expand? Assume that the bulk modulus for gasoline
is . (For more on bulk modulus, seeElasticity: Stress and Strain.)
Strategy
To solve this problem, we must use the following equation, which relates a change in volume to pressure:
13.15
where is pressure, is the original volume, and is the bulk modulus of the material involved. We will use the
amount spilled inExample 13.4as the change in volume, .
Solution
1. Rearrange the equation for calculating pressure:
13.16
2. Insert the known values. The bulk modulus for gasoline is × . In the previous example, the
change in volume is the amount that would spill. Here, is the original volume of the
gasoline. Substituting these values into the equation, we obtain
13.17
Discussion
This pressure is about ,muchmore than a gasoline tank can handle.
Forces and pressures created by thermal stress are typically as great as that in the example above. Railroad tracks
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 561
13.2 • Thermal Expansion of Solids and Liquids 543
and roadways can buckle on hot days if they lack sufficient expansion joints. (SeeFigure 13.14.) Power lines sag
more in the summer than in the winter, and will snap in cold weather if there is insufficient slack. Cracks open and
close in plaster walls as a house warms and cools. Glass cooking pans will crack if cooled rapidly or unevenly,
because of differential contraction and the stresses it creates. (Pyrex® is less susceptible because of its small
coefficient of thermal expansion.) Nuclear reactor pressure vessels are threatened by overly rapid cooling, and
although none have failed, several have been cooled faster than considered desirable. Biological cells are ruptured
when foods are frozen, detracting from their taste. Repeated thawing and freezing accentuate the damage. Even the
oceans can be affected. A significant portion of the rise in sea level that is resulting from global warming is due to
the thermal expansion of sea water.
FIGURE13.14Thermal stress contributes to the formation of potholes. (credit: Editor5807, Wikimedia Commons)
Metal is regularly used in the human body for hip and knee implants. Most implants need to be replaced over time
because, among other things, metal does not bond with bone. Researchers are trying to find better metal coatings
that would allow metal-to-bone bonding. One challenge is to find a coating that has an expansion coefficient similar
to that of metal. If the expansion coefficients are too different, the thermal stresses during the manufacturing
process lead to cracks at the coating-metal interface.
Another example of thermal stress is found in the mouth. Dental fillings can expand differently from tooth enamel. It
can give pain when eating ice cream or having a hot drink. Cracks might occur in the filling. Metal fillings (gold, silver,
etc.) are being replaced by composite fillings (porcelain), which have smaller coefficients of expansion, and are
closer to those of teeth.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Two blocks, A and B, are made of the same material. Block A has dimensions and Block B
has dimensions . If the temperature changes, what is (a) the change in the volume of the two blocks,
(b) the change in the cross-sectional area , and (c) the change in the height of the two blocks?
FIGURE13.15
PAGE: 562
544 13 • Temperature, Kinetic Theory, and the Gas Laws
Solution
(a) The change in volume is proportional to the original volume. Block A has a volume of .Block
B has a volume of which is 4 times that of Block A. Thus the change in volume of Block B
should be 4 times the change in volume of Block A.
(b) The change in area is proportional to the area. The cross-sectional area of Block A is while that
of Block B is Because cross-sectional area of Block B is twice that of Block A, the change in the
cross-sectional area of Block B is twice that of Block A.
(c) The change in height is proportional to the original height. Because the original height of Block B is twice that of
A, the change in the height of Block B is twice that of Block A.
13.3 The Ideal Gas Law
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• State the ideal gas law in terms of molecules and in terms of moles.
• Use the ideal gas law to calculate pressure change, temperature change, volume change, or the number
of molecules or moles in a given volume.
• Use Avogadro’s number to convert between number of molecules and number of moles.
FIGURE13.16The air inside this hot air balloon flying over Putrajaya, Malaysia, is hotter than the ambient air. As a result, the balloon
experiences a buoyant force pushing it upward. (credit: Kevin Poh, Flickr)
In this section, we continue to explore the thermal behavior of gases. In particular, we examine the characteristics
of atoms and molecules that compose gases. (Most gases, for example nitrogen, , and oxygen, , are composed
of two or more atoms. We will primarily use the term “molecule” in discussing a gas because the term can also be
applied to monatomic gases, such as helium.)
Gases are easily compressed. We can see evidence of this inTable 13.2, where you will note that gases have the
largestcoefficients of volume expansion. The large coefficients mean that gases expand and contract very rapidly
with temperature changes. In addition, you will note that most gases expand at thesamerate, or have the same .
This raises the question as to why gases should all act in nearly the same way, when liquids and solids have widely
varying expansion rates.
The answer lies in the large separation of atoms and molecules in gases, compared to their sizes, as illustrated in
Figure 13.17. Because atoms and molecules have large separations, forces between them can be ignored, except
when they collide with each other during collisions. The motion of atoms and molecules (at temperatures well above
the boiling temperature) is fast, such that the gas occupies all of the accessible volume and the expansion of gases
is rapid. In contrast, in liquids and solids, atoms and molecules are closer together and are quite sensitive to the
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 563
13.3 • The Ideal Gas Law 545
forces between them.
FIGURE13.17Atoms and molecules in a gas are typically widely separated, as shown. Because the forces between them are quite weak at
these distances, the properties of a gas depend more on the number of atoms per unit volume and on temperature than on the type of
atom.
To get some idea of how pressure, temperature, and volume of a gas are related to one another, consider what
happens when you pump air into an initially deflated tire. The tire’s volume first increases in direct proportion to the
amount of air injected, without much increase in the tire pressure. Once the tire has expanded to nearly its full size,
the walls limit volume expansion. If we continue to pump air into it, the pressure increases. The pressure will further
increase when the car is driven and the tires move. Most manufacturers specify optimal tire pressure for cold tires.
(SeeFigure 13.18.)
FIGURE13.18(a) When air is pumped into a deflated tire, its volume first increases without much increase in pressure. (b) When the tire is
filled to a certain point, the tire walls resist further expansion and the pressure increases with more air. (c) Once the tire is inflated, its
pressure increases with temperature.
At room temperatures, collisions between atoms and molecules can be ignored. In this case, the gas is called an
ideal gas, in which case the relationship between the pressure, volume, and temperature is given by the equation of
state called the ideal gas law.
Ideal Gas Law
Theideal gas lawstates that
13.18
where is the absolute pressure of a gas, is the volume it occupies, is the number of atoms and molecules
in the gas, and is its absolute temperature. The constant is called theBoltzmann constantin honor of
Austrian physicist Ludwig Boltzmann (1844–1906) and has the value
13.19
The ideal gas law can be derived from basic principles, but was originally deduced from experimental
measurements of Charles’ law (that volume occupied by a gas is proportional to temperature at a fixed pressure)
and from Boyle’s law (that for a fixed temperature, the product is a constant). In the ideal gas model, the volume
occupied by its atoms and molecules is a negligible fraction of . The ideal gas law describes the behavior of real
gases under most conditions. (Note, for example, that is the total number of atoms and molecules, independent
of the type of gas.)
Let us see how the ideal gas law is consistent with the behavior of filling the tire when it is pumped slowly and the
temperature is constant. At first, the pressure is essentially equal to atmospheric pressure, and the volume
increases in direct proportion to the number of atoms and molecules put into the tire. Once the volume of the tire
is constant, the equation predicts that the pressure should increase in proportion tothe number N of
PAGE: 564
546 13 • Temperature, Kinetic Theory, and the Gas Laws
atoms and molecules.
EXAMPLE 13.6
Calculating Pressure Changes Due to Temperature Changes: Tire Pressure
Suppose your bicycle tire is fully inflated, with an absolute pressure of (a gauge pressure of just
under ) at a temperature of . What is the pressure after its temperature has risen to ?
Assume that there are no appreciable leaks or changes in volume.
Strategy
The pressure in the tire is changing only because of changes in temperature. First we need to identify what we know
and what we want to know, and then identify an equation to solve for the unknown.
We know the initial pressure , the initial temperature , and the final temperature
. We must find the final pressure . How can we use the equation ? At first, it may seem
that not enough information is given, because the volume and number of atoms are not specified. What we can
do is use the equation twice: and . If we divide by we can come up with an
equation that allows us to solve for .
13.20
Since the volume is constant, and are the same and they cancel out. The same is true for and , and ,
which is a constant. Therefore,
13.21
We can then rearrange this to solve for :
13.22
where the temperature must be in units of kelvins, because and are absolute temperatures.
Solution
1. Convert temperatures from Celsius to Kelvin.
13.23
2. Substitute the known values into the equation.
13.24
Discussion
The final temperature is about 6% greater than the original temperature, so the final pressure is about 6% greater
as well. Note thatabsolutepressure andabsolutetemperature must be used in the ideal gas law.
Making Connections: Take-Home Experiment—Refrigerating a Balloon
Inflate a balloon at room temperature. Leave the inflated balloon in the refrigerator overnight. What happens to
the balloon, and why?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 565
13.3 • The Ideal Gas Law 547
EXAMPLE 13.7
Calculating the Number of Molecules in a Cubic Meter of Gas
How many molecules are in a typical object, such as gas in a tire or water in a drink? We can use the ideal gas law to
give us an idea of how large typically is.
Calculate the number of molecules in a cubic meter of gas at standard temperature and pressure (STP), which is
defined to be and atmospheric pressure.
Strategy
Because pressure, volume, and temperature are all specified, we can use the ideal gas law , to find .
Solution
1. Identify the knowns.
13.25
2. Identify the unknown: number of molecules, .
3. Rearrange the ideal gas law to solve for .
13.26
4. Substitute the known values into the equation and solve for .
13.27
Discussion
This number is undeniably large, considering that a gas is mostly empty space. is huge, even in small volumes.
For example, of a gas at STP has molecules in it. Once again, note that is the same for all
types or mixtures of gases.
Moles and Avogadro’s Number
It is sometimes convenient to work with a unit other than molecules when measuring the amount of substance. A
mole(abbreviated mol) is defined to be the amount of a substance that contains as many atoms or molecules as
there are atoms in exactly 12 grams (0.012 kg) of carbon-12. The actual number of atoms or molecules in one mole
is calledAvogadro’s number , in recognition of Italian scientist Amedeo Avogadro (1776–1856). He developed
the concept of the mole, based on the hypothesis that equal volumes of gas, at the same pressure and temperature,
contain equal numbers of molecules. That is, the number is independent of the type of gas. This hypothesis has
been confirmed, and the value of Avogadro’s number is
13.28
Avogadro’s Number
One mole always contains particles (atoms or molecules), independent of the element or
substance. A mole of any substance has a mass in grams equal to its molecular mass, which can be calculated
PAGE: 566
548 13 • Temperature, Kinetic Theory, and the Gas Laws
from the atomic masses given in the periodic table of elements.
13.29
FIGURE13.19How big is a mole? On a macroscopic level, one mole of table tennis balls would cover the Earth to a depth of about 40 km.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
The active ingredient in a Tylenol pill is 325 mg of acetaminophen . Find the number of active
molecules of acetaminophen in a single pill.
Solution
We first need to calculate the molar mass (the mass of one mole) of acetaminophen. To do this, we need to multiply
the number of atoms of each element by the element’s atomic mass.
13.30
Then we need to calculate the number of moles in 325 mg.
13.31
Then use Avogadro’s number to calculate the number of molecules.
13.32
EXAMPLE 13.8
Calculating Moles per Cubic Meter and Liters per Mole
Calculate: (a) the number of moles in of gas at STP, and (b) the number of liters of gas per mole.
Strategy and Solution
(a) We are asked to find the number of moles per cubic meter, and we know fromExample 13.7that the number of
molecules per cubic meter at STP is . The number of moles can be found by dividing the number of
molecules by Avogadro’s number. We let stand for the number of moles,
13.33
(b) Using the value obtained for the number of moles in a cubic meter, and converting cubic meters to liters, we
obtain
13.34
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 567
13.3 • The Ideal Gas Law 549
Discussion
This value is very close to the accepted value of 22.4 L/mol. The slight difference is due to rounding errors caused
by using three-digit input. Again this number is the same for all gases. In other words, it is independent of the gas.
The (average) molar weight of air (approximately 80% and 20% is Thus the mass of one cubic
meter of air is 1.28 kg. If a living room has dimensions the mass of air inside the room is 96 kg,
which is the typical mass of a human.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
The density of air at standard conditions and is . At what pressure is the density
if the temperature and number of molecules are kept constant?
Solution
The best way to approach this question is to think about what is happening. If the density drops to half its original
value and no molecules are lost, then the volume must double. If we look at the equation , we see that
when the temperature is constant, the pressure is inversely proportional to volume. Therefore, if the volume
doubles, the pressure must drop to half its original value, and
The Ideal Gas Law Restated Using Moles
A very common expression of the ideal gas law uses the number of moles, , rather than the number of atoms and
molecules, . We start from the ideal gas law,
13.35
and multiply and divide the equation by Avogadro’s number . This gives
13.36
Note that is the number of moles. We define the universal gas constant , and obtain the ideal
gas law in terms of moles.
Ideal Gas Law (in terms of moles)
The ideal gas law (in terms of moles) is
13.37
The numerical value of in SI units is
13.38
In other units,
13.39
You can use whichever value of is most convenient for a particular problem.
EXAMPLE 13.9
Calculating Number of Moles: Gas in a Bike Tire
How many moles of gas are in a bike tire with a volume of a pressure of (a
gauge pressure of just under ), and at a temperature of ?
PAGE: 568
550 13 • Temperature, Kinetic Theory, and the Gas Laws
Strategy
Identify the knowns and unknowns, and choose an equation to solve for the unknown. In this case, we solve the
ideal gas law, , for the number of moles .
Solution
1. Identify the knowns.
13.40
2. Rearrange the equation to solve for and substitute known values.
13.41
Discussion
The most convenient choice for in this case is because our known quantities are in SI units. The
pressure and temperature are obtained from the initial conditions inExample 13.6, but we would get the same
answer if we used the final values.
The ideal gas law can be considered to be another manifestation of the law of conservation of energy (see
Conservation of Energy). Work done on a gas results in an increase in its energy, increasing pressure and/or
temperature, or decreasing volume. This increased energy can also be viewed as increased internal kinetic energy,
given the gas’s atoms and molecules.
The Ideal Gas Law and Energy
Let us now examine the role of energy in the behavior of gases. When you inflate a bike tire by hand, you do work by
repeatedly exerting a force through a distance. This energy goes into increasing the pressure of air inside the tire
and increasing the temperature of the pump and the air.
The ideal gas law is closely related to energy: the units on both sides are joules. The right-hand side of the ideal gas
law in is . This term is roughly the amount of translational kinetic energy of atoms or molecules
at an absolute temperature , as we shall see formally inKinetic Theory: Atomic and Molecular Explanation of
Pressure and Temperature. The left-hand side of the ideal gas law is , which also has the units of joules. We know
from our study of fluids that pressure is one type of potential energy per unit volume, so pressure multiplied by
volume is energy. The important point is that there is energy in a gas related to both its pressure and its volume. The
energy can be changed when the gas is doing work as it expands—something we explore inHeat and Heat Transfer
Methods—similar to what occurs in gasoline or steam engines and turbines.
Problem-Solving Strategy: The Ideal Gas Law
Step 1Examine the situation to determine that an ideal gas is involved. Most gases are nearly ideal.
Step 2Make a list of what quantities are given, or can be inferred from the problem as stated (identify the
known quantities). Convert known values into proper SI units (K for temperature, Pa for pressure, for
volume, molecules for , and moles for ).
Step 3Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem (identify the unknown quantities). A written
list is useful.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 569
13.4 • Kinetic Theory: Atomic and Molecular Explanation of Pressure and Temperature 551
Step 4Determine whether the number of molecules or the number of moles is known, in order to decide which
form of the ideal gas law to use. The first form is and involves , the number of atoms or molecules.
The second form is and involves , the number of moles.
Step 5Solve the ideal gas law for the quantity to be determined (the unknown quantity). You may need to take a
ratio of final states to initial states to eliminate the unknown quantities that are kept fixed.
Step 6Substitute the known quantities, along with their units, into the appropriate equation, and obtain
numerical solutions complete with units. Be certain to use absolute temperature and absolute pressure.
Step 7Check the answer to see if it is reasonable: Does it make sense?
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Liquids and solids have densities about 1000 times greater than gases. Explain how this implies that the distances
between atoms and molecules in gases are about 10 times greater than the size of their atoms and molecules.
Solution
Atoms and molecules are close together in solids and liquids. In gases they are separated by empty space. Thus
gases have lower densities than liquids and solids. Density is mass per unit volume, and volume is related to the size
of a body (such as a sphere) cubed. So if the distance between atoms and molecules increases by a factor of 10,
then the volume occupied increases by a factor of 1000, and the density decreases by a factor of 1000.
13.4 Kinetic Theory: Atomic and Molecular Explanation of Pressure and
Temperature
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Express the ideal gas law in terms of molecular mass and velocity.
• Define thermal energy.
• Calculate the kinetic energy of a gas molecule, given its temperature.
• Describe the relationship between the temperature of a gas and the kinetic energy of atoms and
molecules.
• Describe the distribution of speeds of molecules in a gas.
We have developed macroscopic definitions of pressure and temperature. Pressure is the force divided by the area
on which the force is exerted, and temperature is measured with a thermometer. We gain a better understanding of
pressure and temperature from the kinetic theory of gases, which assumes that atoms and molecules are in
continuous random motion.
PAGE: 570
552 13 • Temperature, Kinetic Theory, and the Gas Laws
FIGURE13.20When a molecule collides with a rigid wall, the component of its momentum perpendicular to the wall is reversed. A force is
thus exerted on the wall, creating pressure.
Figure 13.20shows an elastic collision of a gas molecule with the wall of a container, so that it exerts a force on the
wall (by Newton’s third law). Because a huge number of molecules will collide with the wall in a short time, we
observe an average force per unit area. These collisions are the source of pressure in a gas. As the number of
molecules increases, the number of collisions and thus the pressure increase. Similarly, the gas pressure is higher if
the average velocity of molecules is higher. The actual relationship is derived in theThings Great and Smallfeature
below. The following relationship is found:
13.42
where is the pressure (average force per unit area), is the volume of gas in the container, is the number of
molecules in the container, is the mass of a molecule, and is the average of the molecular speed squared.
What can we learn from this atomic and molecular version of the ideal gas law? We can derive a relationship
between temperature and the average translational kinetic energy of molecules in a gas. Recall the previous
expression of the ideal gas law:
13.43
Equating the right-hand side of this equation with the right-hand side of gives
13.44
Making Connections: Things Great and Small—Atomic and Molecular Origin of
Pressure in a Gas
Figure 13.21shows a box filled with a gas. We know from our previous discussions that putting more gas into
the box produces greater pressure, and that increasing the temperature of the gas also produces a greater
pressure. But why should increasing the temperature of the gas increase the pressure in the box? A look at the
atomic and molecular scale gives us some answers, and an alternative expression for the ideal gas law.
The figure shows an expanded view of an elastic collision of a gas molecule with the wall of a container.
Calculating the average force exerted by such molecules will lead us to the ideal gas law, and to the connection
between temperature and molecular kinetic energy. We assume that a molecule is small compared with the
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 571
13.4 • Kinetic Theory: Atomic and Molecular Explanation of Pressure and Temperature 553
separation of molecules in the gas, and that its interaction with other molecules can be ignored. We also assume
the wall is rigid and that the molecule’s direction changes, but that its speed remains constant (and hence its
kinetic energy and the magnitude of its momentum remain constant as well). This assumption is not always
valid, but the same result is obtained with a more detailed description of the molecule’s exchange of energy and
momentum with the wall.
FIGURE13.21Gas in a box exerts an outward pressure on its walls. A molecule colliding with a rigid wall has the direction of its
velocity and momentum in the -direction reversed. This direction is perpendicular to the wall. The components of its velocity
momentum in the - and -directions are not changed, which means there is no force parallel to the wall.
If the molecule’s velocity changes in the -direction, its momentum changes from to . Thus, its
change in momentum is . The force exerted on the molecule is given by
13.45
There is no force between the wall and the molecule until the molecule hits the wall. During the short time of the
collision, the force between the molecule and wall is relatively large. We are looking for an average force; we
take to be the average time between collisions of the molecule with this wall. It is the time it would take the
molecule to go across the box and back (a distance at a speed of . Thus , and the expression
for the force becomes
13.46
This force is due toonemolecule. We multiply by the number of molecules and use their average squared
velocity to find the force
13.47
where the bar over a quantity means its average value. We would like to have the force in terms of the speed ,
rather than the -component of the velocity. We note that the total velocity squared is the sum of the squares of
its components, so that
13.48
Because the velocities are random, their average components in all directions are the same:
PAGE: 572
554 13 • Temperature, Kinetic Theory, and the Gas Laws
13.49
Thus,
13.50
or
13.51
Substituting into the expression for gives
13.52
The pressure is so that we obtain
13.53
where we used for the volume. This gives the important result.
13.54
This equation is another expression of the ideal gas law.
We can get the average kinetic energy of a molecule, , from the right-hand side of the equation by canceling
and multiplying by 3/2. This calculation produces the result that the average kinetic energy of a molecule is
directly related to absolute temperature.
13.55
The average translational kinetic energy of a molecule, , is calledthermal energy.The equation
is a molecular interpretation of temperature, and it has been found to be valid for gases and
reasonably accurate in liquids and solids. It is another definition of temperature based on an expression of the
molecular energy.
It is sometimes useful to rearrange ,and solve for the average speed of molecules in a gas in
terms of temperature,
13.56
where stands for root-mean-square (rms) speed.
EXAMPLE 13.10
Calculating Kinetic Energy and Speed of a Gas Molecule
(a) What is the average kinetic energy of a gas molecule at (room temperature)? (b) Find the rms speed of a
nitrogen molecule at this temperature.
Strategy for (a)
The known in the equation for the average kinetic energy is the temperature.
13.57
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 573
13.4 • Kinetic Theory: Atomic and Molecular Explanation of Pressure and Temperature 555
Before substituting values into this equation, we must convert the given temperature to kelvins. This conversion
gives
Solution for (a)
The temperature alone is sufficient to find the average translational kinetic energy. Substituting the temperature
into the translational kinetic energy equation gives
13.58
Strategy for (b)
Finding the rms speed of a nitrogen molecule involves a straightforward calculation using the equation
13.59
but we must first find the mass of a nitrogen molecule. Using the molecular mass of nitrogen from the periodic
table,
13.60
Solution for (b)
Substituting this mass and the value for into the equation for yields
13.61
Discussion
Note that the average kinetic energy of the molecule is independent of the type of molecule. The average
translational kinetic energy depends only on absolute temperature. The kinetic energy is very small compared to
macroscopic energies, so that we do not feel when an air molecule is hitting our skin. The rms velocity of the
nitrogen molecule is surprisingly large. These large molecular velocities do not yield macroscopic movement of air,
since the molecules move in all directions with equal likelihood. Themean free path(the distance a molecule can
move on average between collisions) of molecules in air is very small, and so the molecules move rapidly but do not
get very far in a second. The high value for rms speed is reflected in the speed of sound, however, which is about
340 m/s at room temperature. The faster the rms speed of air molecules, the faster that sound vibrations can be
transferred through the air. The speed of sound increases with temperature and is greater in gases with small
molecular masses, such as helium. (SeeFigure 13.22.)
FIGURE13.22(a) There are many molecules moving so fast in an ordinary gas that they collide a billion times every second. (b) Individual
molecules do not move very far in a small amount of time, but disturbances like sound waves are transmitted at speeds related to the
molecular speeds.
PAGE: 574
556 13 • Temperature, Kinetic Theory, and the Gas Laws
Making Connections: Historical Note—Kinetic Theory of Gases
The kinetic theory of gases was developed by Daniel Bernoulli (1700–1782), who is best known in physics for
his work on fluid flow (hydrodynamics). Bernoulli’s work predates the atomistic view of matter established by
Dalton.
Distribution of Molecular Speeds
The motion of molecules in a gas is random in magnitude and direction for individual molecules, but a gas of many
molecules has a predictable distribution of molecular speeds. This distribution is called theMaxwell-Boltzmann
distribution, after its originators, who calculated it based on kinetic theory, and has since been confirmed
experimentally. (SeeFigure 13.23.) The distribution has a long tail, because a few molecules may go several times
the rms speed. The most probable speed is less than the rms speed .Figure 13.24shows that the curve is
shifted to higher speeds at higher temperatures, with a broader range of speeds.
FIGURE13.23The Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution of molecular speeds in an ideal gas. The most likely speed is less than the rms
speed . Although very high speeds are possible, only a tiny fraction of the molecules have speeds that are an order of magnitude
greater than .
The distribution of thermal speeds depends strongly on temperature. As temperature increases, the speeds are
shifted to higher values and the distribution is broadened.
FIGURE13.24The Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution is shifted to higher speeds and is broadened at higher temperatures.
What is the implication of the change in distribution with temperature shown inFigure 13.24for humans? All other
things being equal, if a person has a fever, they are likely to lose more water molecules, particularly from linings
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 575
13.4 • Kinetic Theory: Atomic and Molecular Explanation of Pressure and Temperature 557
along moist cavities such as the lungs and mouth, creating a dry sensation in the mouth.
EXAMPLE 13.11
Calculating Temperature: Escape Velocity of Helium Atoms
In order to escape Earth’s gravity, an object near the top of the atmosphere (at an altitude of 100 km) must travel
away from Earth at 11.1 km/s. This speed is called theescape velocity. At what temperature would helium atoms
have an rms speed equal to the escape velocity?
Strategy
Identify the knowns and unknowns and determine which equations to use to solve the problem.
Solution
1. Identify the knowns: is the escape velocity, 11.1 km/s.
2. Identify the unknowns: We need to solve for temperature, . We also need to solve for the mass of the helium
atom.
3. Determine which equations are needed.
• To solve for mass of the helium atom, we can use information from the periodic table:
13.62
• To solve for temperature , we can rearrange either
13.63
or
13.64
to yield
13.65
where is the Boltzmann constant and is the mass of a helium atom.
4. Plug the known values into the equations and solve for the unknowns.
13.66
13.67
Discussion
This temperature is much higher than atmospheric temperature, which is approximately 250 K or at
high altitude. Very few helium atoms are left in the atmosphere, but there were many when the atmosphere was
formed. The reason for the loss of helium atoms is that there are a small number of helium atoms with speeds
higher than Earth’s escape velocity even at normal temperatures. The speed of a helium atom changes from one
instant to the next, so that at any instant, there is a small, but nonzero chance that the speed is greater than the
escape speed and the molecule escapes from Earth’s gravitational pull. Heavier molecules, such as oxygen,
nitrogen, and water (very little of which reach a very high altitude), have smaller rms speeds, and so it is much less
likely that any of them will have speeds greater than the escape velocity. In fact, so few have speeds above the
PAGE: 576
558 13 • Temperature, Kinetic Theory, and the Gas Laws
escape velocity that billions of years are required to lose significant amounts of the atmosphere.Figure 13.25shows
the impact of a lack of an atmosphere on the Moon. Because the gravitational pull of the Moon is much weaker, it
has lost almost its entire atmosphere. The comparison between Earth and the Moon is discussed in this chapter’s
Problems and Exercises.
FIGURE13.25This photograph of Apollo 17 Commander Eugene Cernan driving the lunar rover on the Moon in 1972 looks as though it was
taken at night with a large spotlight. In fact, the light is coming from the Sun. Because the acceleration due to gravity on the Moon is so low
(about 1/6 that of Earth), the Moon’s escape velocity is much smaller. As a result, gas molecules escape very easily from the Moon, leaving
it with virtually no atmosphere. Even during the daytime, the sky is black because there is no gas to scatter sunlight. (credit: Harrison H.
Schmitt/NASA)
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
If you consider a very small object such as a grain of pollen, in a gas, then the number of atoms and molecules
striking its surface would also be relatively small. Would the grain of pollen experience any fluctuations in pressure
due to statistical fluctuations in the number of gas atoms and molecules striking it in a given amount of time?
Solution
Yes. Such fluctuations actually occur for a body of any size in a gas, but since the numbers of atoms and molecules
are immense for macroscopic bodies, the fluctuations are a tiny percentage of the number of collisions, and the
averages spoken of in this section vary imperceptibly. Roughly speaking the fluctuations are proportional to the
inverse square root of the number of collisions, so for small bodies they can become significant. This was actually
observed in the 19th century for pollen grains in water, and is known as the Brownian effect.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Gas Properties
Pump gas molecules into a box and see what happens as you change the volume, add or remove heat, change
gravity, and more. Measure the temperature and pressure, and discover how the properties of the gas vary in
relation to each other.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/13-4-kinetic-theory-atomic-and-
molecular-explanation-of-pressure-and-temperature)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 577
13.5 • Phase Changes 559
13.5 Phase Changes
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Interpret a phase diagram.
• State Dalton’s law.
• Identify and describe the triple point of a gas from its phase diagram.
• Describe the state of equilibrium between a liquid and a gas, a liquid and a solid, and a gas and a solid.
Up to now, we have considered the behavior of ideal gases. Real gases are like ideal gases at high temperatures. At
lower temperatures, however, the interactions between the molecules and their volumes cannot be ignored. The
molecules are very close (condensation occurs) and there is a dramatic decrease in volume, as seen inFigure 13.26.
The substance changes from a gas to a liquid. When a liquid is cooled to even lower temperatures, it becomes a
solid. The volume never reaches zero because of the finite volume of the molecules.
FIGURE13.26A sketch of volume versus temperature for a real gas at constant pressure. The linear (straight line) part of the graph
represents ideal gas behavior—volume and temperature are directly and positively related and the line extrapolates to zero volume at
, or absolute zero. When the gas becomes a liquid, however, the volume actually decreases precipitously at the liquefaction
point. The volume decreases slightly once the substance is solid, but it never becomes zero.
High pressure may also cause a gas to change phase to a liquid. Carbon dioxide, for example, is a gas at room
temperature and atmospheric pressure, but becomes a liquid under sufficiently high pressure. If the pressure is
reduced, the temperature drops and the liquid carbon dioxide solidifies into a snow-like substance at the
temperature . Solid is called “dry ice.” Another example of a gas that can be in a liquid phase is liquid
nitrogen . is made by liquefaction of atmospheric air (through compression and cooling). It boils at 77 K
at atmospheric pressure. is useful as a refrigerant and allows for the preservation of blood, sperm,
and other biological materials. It is also used to reduce noise in electronic sensors and equipment, and to help cool
down their current-carrying wires. In dermatology, is used to freeze and painlessly remove warts and other
growths from the skin.
PVDiagrams
We can examine aspects of the behavior of a substance by plotting a graph of pressure versus volume, called aPV
diagram. When the substance behaves like an ideal gas, the ideal gas law describes the relationship between its
pressure and volume. That is,
13.68
Now, assuming the number of molecules and the temperature are fixed,
13.69
For example, the volume of the gas will decrease as the pressure increases. If you plot the relationship
on a diagram, you find a hyperbola.Figure 13.27shows a graph of pressure versus volume. The
PAGE: 578
560 13 • Temperature, Kinetic Theory, and the Gas Laws
hyperbolas represent ideal-gas behavior at various fixed temperatures, and are calledisotherms. At lower
temperatures, the curves begin to look less like hyperbolas—the gas is not behaving ideally and may even contain
liquid. There is acritical point—that is, acritical temperature—above which liquid cannot exist. At sufficiently high
pressure above the critical point, the gas will have the density of a liquid but will not condense. Carbon dioxide, for
example, cannot be liquefied at a temperature above .Critical pressureis the minimum pressure needed for
liquid to exist at the critical temperature.Table 13.3lists representative critical temperatures and pressures.
FIGURE13.27 diagrams. (a) Each curve (isotherm) represents the relationship between and at a fixed temperature; the upper
curves are at higher temperatures. The lower curves are not hyperbolas, because the gas is no longer an ideal gas. (b) An expanded portion
of the diagram for low temperatures, where the phase can change from a gas to a liquid. The term “vapor” refers to the gas phase when
it exists at a temperature below the boiling temperature.
Substance Critical temperature Critical pressure
Water 647.4 374.3 219.0
Sulfur dioxide 430.7 157.6 78.0
Ammonia 405.5 132.4 111.7
Carbon dioxide 304.2 31.1 73.2
Oxygen 154.8 −118.4 50.3
Nitrogen 126.2 −146.9 33.6
Hydrogen 33.3 −239.9 12.9
Helium 5.3 −267.9 2.27
TABLE13.3Critical Temperatures and Pressures
Phase Diagrams
The plots of pressure versus temperatures provide considerable insight into thermal properties of substances. There
are well-defined regions on these graphs that correspond to various phases of matter, so graphs are called
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 579
13.5 • Phase Changes 561
phase diagrams.Figure 13.28shows the phase diagram for water. Using the graph, if you know the pressure and
temperature you can determine the phase of water. The solid lines—boundaries between phases—indicate
temperatures and pressures at which the phases coexist (that is, they exist together in ratios, depending on
pressure and temperature). For example, the boiling point of water is at 1.00 atm. As the pressure increases,
the boiling temperature rises steadily to at a pressure of 218 atm. A pressure cooker (or even a covered pot)
will cook food faster because the water can exist as a liquid at temperatures greater than without all boiling
away. The curve ends at a point called thecritical point, because at higher temperatures the liquid phase does not
exist at any pressure. The critical point occurs at the critical temperature, as you can see for water fromTable 13.3.
The critical temperature for oxygen is , so oxygen cannot be liquefied above this temperature.
FIGURE13.28The phase diagram ( graph) for water. Note that the axes are nonlinear and the graph is not to scale. This graph is
simplified—there are several other exotic phases of ice at higher pressures.
Similarly, the curve between the solid and liquid regions inFigure 13.28gives the melting temperature at various
pressures. For example, the melting point is at 1.00 atm, as expected. Note that, at a fixed temperature, you can
change the phase from solid (ice) to liquid (water) by increasing the pressure. Ice melts from pressure in the hands
of a snowball maker. From the phase diagram, we can also say that the melting temperature of ice falls with
increased pressure. When a car is driven over snow, the increased pressure from the tires melts the snowflakes;
afterwards the water refreezes and forms an ice layer.
At sufficiently low pressures there is no liquid phase, but the substance can exist as either gas or solid. For water,
there is no liquid phase at pressures below 0.00600 atm. The phase change from solid to gas is calledsublimation.
It accounts for large losses of snow pack that never make it into a river, the routine automatic defrosting of a freezer,
and the freeze-drying process applied to many foods. Carbon dioxide, on the other hand, sublimates at standard
atmospheric pressure of 1 atm. (The solid form of is known as dry ice because it does not melt. Instead, it
moves directly from the solid to the gas state.)
All three curves on the phase diagram meet at a single point, thetriple point, where all three phases exist in
equilibrium. For water, the triple point occurs at 273.16 K , and is a more accurate calibration temperature
than the melting point of water at 1.00 atm, or 273.15 K . SeeTable 13.4for the triple point values of other
substances.
Equilibrium
Liquid and gas phases are in equilibrium at the boiling temperature. (SeeFigure 13.29.) If a substance is in a closed
container at the boiling point, then the liquid is boiling and the gas is condensing at the same rate without net
change in their relative amount. Molecules in the liquid escape as a gas at the same rate at which gas molecules
stick to the liquid, or form droplets and become part of the liquid phase. The combination of temperature and
pressure has to be “just right”; if the temperature and pressure are increased, equilibrium is maintained by the
same increase of boiling and condensation rates.
PAGE: 580
562 13 • Temperature, Kinetic Theory, and the Gas Laws
FIGURE13.29Equilibrium between liquid and gas at two different boiling points inside a closed container. (a) The rates of boiling and
condensation are equal at this combination of temperature and pressure, so the liquid and gas phases are in equilibrium. (b) At a higher
temperature, the boiling rate is faster and the rates at which molecules leave the liquid and enter the gas are also faster. Because there are
more molecules in the gas, the gas pressure is higher and the rate at which gas molecules condense and enter the liquid is faster. As a
result the gas and liquid are in equilibrium at this higher temperature.
Substance Temperature Pressure
Water 273.16 0.01 0.00600
Carbon dioxide 216.55 −56.60 5.11
Sulfur dioxide 197.68 −75.47 0.0167
Ammonia 195.40 −77.75 0.0600
Nitrogen 63.18 −210.0 0.124
Oxygen 54.36 −218.8 0.00151
Hydrogen 13.84 −259.3 0.0697
TABLE13.4Triple Point Temperatures and Pressures
One example of equilibrium between liquid and gas is that of water and steam at and 1.00 atm. This
temperature is the boiling point at that pressure, so they should exist in equilibrium. Why does an open pot of water
at boil completely away? The gas surrounding an open pot is not pure water: it is mixed with air. If pure water
and steam are in a closed container at and 1.00 atm, they would coexist—but with air over the pot, there are
fewer water molecules to condense, and water boils. What about water at and 1.00 atm? This temperature
and pressure correspond to the liquid region, yet an open glass of water at this temperature will completely
evaporate. Again, the gas around it is air and not pure water vapor, so that the reduced evaporation rate is greater
than the condensation rate of water from dry air. If the glass is sealed, then the liquid phase remains. We call the gas
phase avaporwhen it exists, as it does for water at , at a temperature below the boiling temperature.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Explain why a cup of water (or soda) with ice cubes stays at , even on a hot summer day.
Solution
The ice and liquid water are in thermal equilibrium, so that the temperature stays at the freezing temperature as
long as ice remains in the liquid. (Once all of the ice melts, the water temperature will start to rise.)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 581
13.6 • Humidity, Evaporation, and Boiling 563
Vapor Pressure, Partial Pressure, and Dalton’s Law
Vapor pressureis defined as the pressure at which a gas coexists with its solid or liquid phase. Vapor pressure is
created by faster molecules that break away from the liquid or solid and enter the gas phase. The vapor pressure of
a substance depends on both the substance and its temperature—an increase in temperature increases the vapor
pressure.
Partial pressureis defined as the pressure a gas would create if it occupied the total volume available. In a mixture
of gases,the total pressure is the sum of partial pressures of the component gases, assuming ideal gas behavior and
no chemical reactions between the components. This law is known asDalton’s law of partial pressures, after the
English scientist John Dalton (1766–1844), who proposed it. Dalton’s law is based on kinetic theory, where each gas
creates its pressure by molecular collisions, independent of other gases present. It is consistent with the fact that
pressures add according toPascal’s Principle. Thus water evaporates and ice sublimates when their vapor pressures
exceed the partial pressure of water vapor in the surrounding mixture of gases. If their vapor pressures are less than
the partial pressure of water vapor in the surrounding gas, liquid droplets or ice crystals (frost) form.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Is energy transfer involved in a phase change? If so, will energy have to be supplied to change phase from solid to
liquid and liquid to gas? What about gas to liquid and liquid to solid? Why do they spray the orange trees with water
in Florida when the temperatures are near or just below freezing?
Solution
Yes, energy transfer is involved in a phase change. We know that atoms and molecules in solids and liquids are
bound to each other because we know that force is required to separate them. So in a phase change from solid to
liquid and liquid to gas, a force must be exerted, perhaps by collision, to separate atoms and molecules. Force
exerted through a distance is work, and energy is needed to do work to go from solid to liquid and liquid to gas. This
is intuitively consistent with the need for energy to melt ice or boil water. The converse is also true. Going from gas
to liquid or liquid to solid involves atoms and molecules pushing together, doing work and releasing energy.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
States of Matter—Basics
Heat, cool, and compress atoms and molecules and watch as they change between solid, liquid, and gas phases.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/13-5-phase-changes)
13.6 Humidity, Evaporation, and Boiling
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the relationship between vapor pressure of water and the capacity of air to hold water vapor.
• Explain the relationship between relative humidity and partial pressure of water vapor in the air.
• Calculate vapor density using vapor pressure.
• Calculate humidity and dew point.
PAGE: 582
564 13 • Temperature, Kinetic Theory, and the Gas Laws
FIGURE13.30Dew drops like these, on a banana leaf photographed just after sunrise, form when the air temperature drops to or below the
dew point. At the dew point, the rate at which water molecules join together is greater than the rate at which they separate, and some of
the water condenses to form droplets. (credit: Aaron Escobar, Flickr)
The expression “it’s not the heat, it’s the humidity” makes a valid point. We keep cool in hot weather by evaporating
sweat from our skin and water from our breathing passages. Because evaporation is inhibited by high humidity, we
feel hotter at a given temperature when the humidity is high. Low humidity, on the other hand, can cause discomfort
from excessive drying of mucous membranes and can lead to an increased risk of respiratory infections.
When we say humidity, we really meanrelative humidity. Relative humidity tells us how much water vapor is in the
air compared with the maximum possible. At its maximum, denoted assaturation, the relative humidity is 100%,
and evaporation is inhibited. The amount of water vapor in the air depends on temperature. For example, relative
humidity rises in the evening, as air temperature declines, sometimes reaching thedew point. At the dew point
temperature, relative humidity is 100%, and fog may result from the condensation of water droplets if they are small
enough to stay in suspension. Conversely, if you wish to dry something (perhaps your hair), it is more effective to
blow hot air over it rather than cold air, because, among other things, the increase in temperature increases the
energy of the molecules, so the rate of evaporation increases.
The amount of water vapor in the air depends on the vapor pressure of water. The liquid and solid phases are
continuously giving off vapor because some of the molecules have high enough speeds to enter the gas phase; see
Figure 13.31(a). If a lid is placed over the container, as inFigure 13.31(b), evaporation continues, increasing the
pressure, until sufficient vapor has built up for condensation to balance evaporation. Then equilibrium has been
achieved, and the vapor pressure is equal to the partial pressure of water in the container. Vapor pressure increases
with temperature because molecular speeds are higher as temperature increases.Table 13.5gives representative
values of water vapor pressure over a range of temperatures.
FIGURE13.31(a) Because of the distribution of speeds and kinetic energies, some water molecules can break away to the vapor phase
even at temperatures below the ordinary boiling point. (b) If the container is sealed, evaporation will continue until there is enough vapor
density for the condensation rate to equal the evaporation rate. This vapor density and the partial pressure it creates are the saturation
values. They increase with temperature and are independent of the presence of other gases, such as air. They depend only on the vapor
pressure of water.
Relative humidity is related to the partial pressure of water vapor in the air. At 100% humidity, the partial pressure is
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 583
13.6 • Humidity, Evaporation, and Boiling 565
equal to the vapor pressure, and no more water can enter the vapor phase. If the partial pressure is less than the
vapor pressure, then evaporation will take place, as humidity is less than 100%. If the partial pressure is greater
than the vapor pressure, condensation takes place. In everyday language, people sometimes refer to the capacity of
air to “hold” water vapor, but this is not actually what happens. The water vapor is not held by the air. The amount of
water in air is determined by the vapor pressure of water and has nothing to do with the properties of air.
Temperature Vapor pressure (Pa) Saturation vapor density (g/m3)
−50 4.0 0.039
−20 0.89
−10 2.36
0 4.84
5 6.80
10 9.40
15 12.8
20 17.2
25 23.0
30 30.4
37 44.0
40 51.1
50 82.4
60 130
70 197
80 294
90 418
95 505
100 598
120 1095
150 2430
TABLE13.5Saturation Vapor Density of Water
PAGE: 584
566 13 • Temperature, Kinetic Theory, and the Gas Laws
Temperature Vapor pressure (Pa) Saturation vapor density (g/m3)
200 7090
220 10,200
TABLE13.5Saturation Vapor Density of Water
EXAMPLE 13.12
Calculating Density Using Vapor Pressure
Table 13.5gives the vapor pressure of water at as Use the ideal gas law to calculate the
density of water vapor in that would create a partial pressure equal to this vapor pressure. Compare the result
with the saturation vapor density given in the table.
Strategy
To solve this problem, we need to break it down into a two steps. The partial pressure follows the ideal gas law,
13.70
where is the number of moles. If we solve this equation for to calculate the number of moles per cubic meter,
we can then convert this quantity to grams per cubic meter as requested. To do this, we need to use the molecular
mass of water, which is given in the periodic table.
Solution
1. Identify the knowns and convert them to the proper units:
a. temperature
b. vapor pressure of water at is
c. molecular mass of water is
2. Solve the ideal gas law for .
13.71
3. Substitute known values into the equation and solve for .
13.72
4. Convert the density in moles per cubic meter to grams per cubic meter.
13.73
Discussion
The density is obtained by assuming a pressure equal to the vapor pressure of water at . The density found is
identical to the value inTable 13.5, which means that a vapor density of at creates a partial
pressure of equal to the vapor pressure of water at that temperature. If the partial pressure is equal
to the vapor pressure, then the liquid and vapor phases are in equilibrium, and the relative humidity is 100%. Thus,
there can be no more than 17.2 g of water vapor per at , so that this value is the saturation vapor density
at that temperature. This example illustrates how water vapor behaves like an ideal gas: the pressure and density
are consistent with the ideal gas law (assuming the density in the table is correct). The saturation vapor densities
listed inTable 13.5are the maximum amounts of water vapor that air can hold at various temperatures.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 585
13.6 • Humidity, Evaporation, and Boiling 567
Percent Relative Humidity
We definepercent relative humidityas the ratio of vapor density to saturation vapor density, or
13.74
We can use this and the data inTable 13.5to do a variety of interesting calculations, keeping in mind that relative
humidity is based on the comparison of the partial pressure of water vapor in air and ice.
EXAMPLE 13.13
Calculating Humidity and Dew Point
(a) Calculate the percent relative humidity on a day when the temperature is and the air contains 9.40 g of
water vapor per . (b) At what temperature will this air reach 100% relative humidity (the saturation density)? This
temperature is the dew point. (c) What is the humidity when the air temperature is and the dew point is
?
Strategy and Solution
(a) Percent relative humidity is defined as the ratio of vapor density to saturation vapor density.
13.75
The first is given to be , and the second is found inTable 13.5to be . Thus,
13.76
(b) The air contains of water vapor. The relative humidity will be 100% at a temperature where
is the saturation density. Inspection ofTable 13.5reveals this to be the case at , where the relative humidity
will be 100%. That temperature is called the dew point for air with this concentration of water vapor.
(c) Here, the dew point temperature is given to be . UsingTable 13.5, we see that the vapor density is
, because this value is the saturation vapor density at . The saturation vapor density at is
seen to be . Thus, the relative humidity at is
13.77
Discussion
The importance of dew point is that air temperature cannot drop below in part (b), or in part (c),
without water vapor condensing out of the air. If condensation occurs, considerable transfer of heat occurs
(discussed inHeat and Heat Transfer Methods), which prevents the temperature from further dropping. When dew
points are below , freezing temperatures are a greater possibility, which explains why farmers keep track of the
dew point. Low humidity in deserts means low dew-point temperatures. Thus condensation is unlikely. If the
temperature drops, vapor does not condense in liquid drops. Because no heat is released into the air, the air
temperature drops more rapidly compared to air with higher humidity. Likewise, at high temperatures, liquid
droplets do not evaporate, so that no heat is removed from the gas to the liquid phase. This explains the large range
of temperature in arid regions.
Why does water boil at ? You will note fromTable 13.5that the vapor pressure of water at is
, or 1.00 atm. Thus, it can evaporate without limit at this temperature and pressure. But why does it
PAGE: 586
568 13 • Temperature, Kinetic Theory, and the Gas Laws
form bubbles when it boils? This is because water ordinarily contains significant amounts of dissolved air and other
impurities, which are observed as small bubbles of air in a glass of water. If a bubble starts out at the bottom of the
container at , it contains water vapor (about 2.30%). The pressure inside the bubble is fixed at 1.00 atm (we
ignore the slight pressure exerted by the water around it). As the temperature rises, the amount of air in the bubble
stays the same, but the water vapor increases; the bubble expands to keep the pressure at 1.00 atm. At ,
water vapor enters the bubble continuously since the partial pressure of water is equal to 1.00 atm in equilibrium. It
cannot reach this pressure, however, since the bubble also contains air and total pressure is 1.00 atm. The bubble
grows in size and thereby increases the buoyant force. The bubble breaks away and rises rapidly to the surface—we
call this boiling! (SeeFigure 13.32.)
FIGURE13.32(a) An air bubble in water starts out saturated with water vapor at . (b) As the temperature rises, water vapor enters the
bubble because its vapor pressure increases. The bubble expands to keep its pressure at 1.00 atm. (c) At , water vapor enters the
bubble continuously because water’s vapor pressure exceeds its partial pressure in the bubble, which must be less than 1.00 atm. The
bubble grows and rises to the surface.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Freeze drying is a process in which substances, such as foods, are dried by placing them in a vacuum chamber and
lowering the atmospheric pressure around them. How does the lowered atmospheric pressure speed the drying
process, and why does it cause the temperature of the food to drop?
Solution
Decreased the atmospheric pressure results in decreased partial pressure of water, hence a lower humidity. So
evaporation of water from food, for example, will be enhanced. The molecules of water most likely to break away
from the food will be those with the greatest velocities. Those remaining thus have a lower average velocity and a
lower temperature. This can (and does) result in the freezing and drying of the food; hence the process is aptly
named freeze drying.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
States of Matter
Watch different types of molecules form a solid, liquid, or gas. Add or remove heat and watch the phase change.
Change the temperature or volume of a container and see a pressure-temperature diagram respond in real time.
Relate the interaction potential to the forces between molecules.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/13-6-humidity-evaporation-and-
boiling)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 587
13 • Glossary 569
Glossary
absolute zero the lowest possible temperature; the Kelvin scale temperature scale in which 0 K is the
temperature at which all molecular motion ceases lowest possible temperature, representing absolute
Avogadro’s number , the number of molecules zero
or atoms in one mole of a substance; mole the quantity of a substance whose mass (in
particles/mole grams) is equal to its molecular mass
Boltzmann constant , a physical constant that partial pressure the pressure a gas would create if it
relates energy to temperature; occupied the total volume of space available
percent relative humidity the ratio of vapor density
Celsius scale temperature scale in which the freezing to saturation vapor density
point of water is and the boiling point of water is phase diagram a graph of pressure vs. temperature
of a particular substance, showing at which
coefficient of linear expansion , the change in pressures and temperatures the three phases of the
length, per unit length, per change in substance occur
temperature; a constant used in the calculation of PVdiagram a graph of pressure vs. volume
linear expansion; the coefficient of linear expansion relative humidity the amount of water in the air
depends on the material and to some degree on the relative to the maximum amount the air can hold
temperature of the material saturation the condition of 100% relative humidity
coefficient of volume expansion , the change in sublimation the phase change from solid to gas
volume, per unit volume, per change in temperature the quantity measured by a
temperature thermometer
critical point the temperature above which a liquid thermal energy , the average translational kinetic
cannot exist energy of a molecule
critical pressure the minimum pressure needed for a thermal equilibrium the condition in which heat no
liquid to exist at the critical temperature longer flows between two objects that are in
critical temperature the temperature above which a contact; the two objects have the same temperature
liquid cannot exist thermal expansion the change in size or volume of
Dalton’s law of partial pressures the physical law an object with change in temperature
that states that the total pressure of a gas is the thermal stress stress caused by thermal expansion
sum of partial pressures of the component gases or contraction
degree Celsius unit on the Celsius temperature scale triple point the pressure and temperature at which a
degree Fahrenheit unit on the Fahrenheit substance exists in equilibrium as a solid, liquid,
temperature scale and gas
dew point the temperature at which relative humidity vapor a gas at a temperature below the boiling
is 100%; the temperature at which water starts to temperature
condense out of the air vapor pressure the pressure at which a gas coexists
Fahrenheit scale temperature scale in which the with its solid or liquid phase
freezing point of water is and the boiling point zeroth law of thermodynamics law that states that if
of water is two objects are in thermal equilibrium, and a third
ideal gas law the physical law that relates the object is in thermal equilibrium with one of those
pressure and volume of a gas to the number of gas objects, it is also in thermal equilibrium with the
molecules or number of moles of gas and the other object
temperature of the gas
Section Summary
13.1Temperature • There are three main temperature scales: Celsius,
Fahrenheit, and Kelvin.
• Temperature is the quantity measured by a
• Temperatures on one scale can be converted to
thermometer.
temperatures on another scale using the following
• Temperature is related to the average kinetic
equations:
energy of atoms and molecules in a system.
• Absolute zero is the temperature at which there is
no molecular motion.
PAGE: 588
570 13 • Section Summary
• A mole of any substance has a mass in grams
equal to its molecular weight, which can be
determined from the periodic table of elements.
• Systems are in thermal equilibrium when they
• The ideal gas law can also be written and solved in
have the same temperature.
terms of the number of moles of gas:
• Thermal equilibrium occurs when two bodies are
in contact with each other and can freely exchange
where is number of moles and is the universal
energy.
gas constant,
• The zeroth law of thermodynamics states that
when two systems, A and B, are in thermal
• The ideal gas law is generally valid at
equilibrium with each other, and B is in thermal
temperatures well above the boiling temperature.
equilibrium with a third system, C, then A is also in
13.4Kinetic Theory: Atomic and Molecular
thermal equilibrium with C.
Explanation of Pressure and Temperature
13.2Thermal Expansion of Solids and
Liquids • Kinetic theory is the atomistic description of gases
as well as liquids and solids.
• Thermal expansion is the increase, or decrease, of
• Kinetic theory models the properties of matter in
the size (length, area, or volume) of a body due to
terms of continuous random motion of atoms and
a change in temperature.
molecules.
• Thermal expansion is large for gases, and
• The ideal gas law can also be expressed as
relatively small, but not negligible, for liquids and
solids.
• Linear thermal expansion is where is the pressure (average force per unit
area), is the volume of gas in the container, is
where is the change in length , is the the number of molecules in the container, is the
change in temperature, and is the coefficient of mass of a molecule, and is the average of the
linear expansion, which varies slightly with molecular speed squared.
temperature. • Thermal energy is defined to be the average
• The change in area due to thermal expansion is translational kinetic energy of an atom or
molecule.
where is the change in area. • The temperature of gases is proportional to the
• The change in volume due to thermal expansion is average translational kinetic energy of atoms and
molecules.
where is the coefficient of volume expansion and
. Thermal stress is created when thermal
expansion is constrained. or
13.3The Ideal Gas Law
• The ideal gas law relates the pressure and volume
• The motion of individual molecules in a gas is
of a gas to the number of gas molecules and the
random in magnitude and direction. However, a
temperature of the gas.
gas of many molecules has a predictable
• The ideal gas law can be written in terms of the
distribution of molecular speeds, known as the
number of molecules of gas:
Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution.
where is pressure, is volume, is 13.5Phase Changes
temperature, is number of molecules, and is
• Most substances have three distinct phases: gas,
the Boltzmann constant
liquid, and solid.
• Phase changes among the various phases of
• A mole is the number of atoms in a 12-g sample of
matter depend on temperature and pressure.
carbon-12.
• The existence of the three phases with respect to
• The number of molecules in a mole is called
pressure and temperature can be described in a
Avogadro’s number ,
phase diagram.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 589
13 • Conceptual Questions 571
• Two phases coexist (i.e., they are in thermal sum of the partial pressures of all of the gases
equilibrium) at a set of pressures and present.
temperatures. These are described as a line on a
13.6Humidity, Evaporation, and Boiling
phase diagram.
• The three phases coexist at a single pressure and • Relative humidity is the fraction of water vapor in a
temperature. This is known as the triple point and gas compared to the saturation value.
is described by a single point on a phase diagram. • The saturation vapor density can be determined
• A gas at a temperature below its boiling point is from the vapor pressure for a given temperature.
called a vapor. • Percent relative humidity is defined to be
• Vapor pressure is the pressure at which a gas
coexists with its solid or liquid phase.
• Partial pressure is the pressure a gas would create
• The dew point is the temperature at which air
if it existed alone.
reaches 100% relative humidity.
• Dalton’s law states that the total pressure is the
Conceptual Questions
13.1Temperature 7. One method of getting a tight fit, say of a metal peg
in a hole in a metal block, is to manufacture the peg
1. What does it mean to say that two systems are in
slightly larger than the hole. The peg is then
thermal equilibrium?
inserted when at a different temperature than the
2. Give an example of a physical property that varies
block. Should the block be hotter or colder than the
with temperature and describe how it is used to
peg during insertion? Explain your answer.
measure temperature.
8. Does it really help to run hot water over a tight
3. When a cold alcohol thermometer is placed in a hot
metal lid on a glass jar before trying to open it?
liquid, the column of alcohol goesdownslightly
Explain your answer.
before going up. Explain why.
9. Liquids and solids expand with increasing
4. If you add boiling water to a cup at room
temperature, because the kinetic energy of a body’s
temperature, what would you expect the final
atoms and molecules increases. Explain why some
equilibrium temperature of the unit to be? You will
materialsshrinkwith increasing temperature.
need to include the surroundings as part of the
system. Consider the zeroth law of
13.3The Ideal Gas Law
thermodynamics.
10. Find out the human population of Earth. Is there a
13.2Thermal Expansion of Solids and mole of people inhabiting Earth? If the average
Liquids mass of a person is 60 kg, calculate the mass of a
mole of people. How does the mass of a mole of
5. Thermal stresses caused by uneven cooling can
people compare with the mass of Earth?
easily break glass cookware. Explain why Pyrex®, a
11. Under what circumstances would you expect a gas
glass with a small coefficient of linear expansion, is
to behave significantly differently than predicted
less susceptible.
by the ideal gas law?
6. Water expands significantly when it freezes: a
12. A constant-volume gas thermometer contains a
volume increase of about 9% occurs. As a result of
fixed amount of gas. What property of the gas is
this expansion and because of the formation and
measured to indicate its temperature?
growth of crystals as water freezes, anywhere from
10% to 30% of biological cells are burst when
13.4Kinetic Theory: Atomic and Molecular
animal or plant material is frozen. Discuss the
Explanation of Pressure and Temperature
implications of this cell damage for the prospect of
preserving human bodies by freezing so that they 13. How is momentum related to the pressure exerted
can be thawed at some future date when it is hoped by a gas? Explain on the atomic and molecular
that all diseases are curable. level, considering the behavior of atoms and
molecules.
PAGE: 590
572 13 • Problems & Exercises
13.5Phase Changes 17. Can carbon dioxide be liquefied at room
temperature ( )? If so, how? If not, why not?
14. A pressure cooker contains water and steam in
(SeeFigure 13.33.)
equilibrium at a pressure greater than
18. Oxygen cannot be liquefied at room temperature
atmospheric pressure. How does this greater
by placing it under a large enough pressure to
pressure increase cooking speed?
force its molecules together. Explain why this is.
15. Why does condensation form most rapidly on the
19. What is the distinction between gas and vapor?
coldest object in a room—for example, on a glass
of ice water?
13.6Humidity, Evaporation, and Boiling
16. What is the vapor pressure of solid carbon dioxide
(dry ice) at ? 20. Because humidity depends only on water’s vapor
pressure and temperature, are the saturation
vapor densities listed inTable 13.5valid in an
atmosphere of helium at a pressure of
, rather than air? Are those
values affected by altitude on Earth?
21. Why does a beaker of water placed in a
vacuum chamber start to boil as the chamber is
evacuated (air is pumped out of the chamber)? At
what pressure does the boiling begin? Would food
cook any faster in such a beaker?
22. Why does rubbing alcohol evaporate much more
rapidly than water at STP (standard temperature
and pressure)?
FIGURE13.33The phase diagram for carbon dioxide. The
axes are nonlinear, and the graph is not to scale. Dry ice is
solid carbon dioxide and has a sublimation temperature of
.
Problems & Exercises
13.1Temperature 7. (a) Suppose a cold front blows into your locale and
drops the temperature by 40.0 Fahrenheit degrees.
1. What is the Fahrenheit temperature of a person
How many degrees Celsius does the temperature
with a fever?
decrease when there is a decrease in
2. Frost damage to most plants occurs at
temperature? (b) Show that any change in
temperatures of or lower. What is this
temperature in Fahrenheit degrees is nine-fifths the
temperature on the Kelvin scale?
change in Celsius degrees.
3. To conserve energy, room temperatures are kept at
8. (a) At what temperature do the Fahrenheit and
in the winter and in the summer.
Celsius scales have the same numerical value? (b)
What are these temperatures on the Celsius scale?
At what temperature do the Fahrenheit and Kelvin
4. A tungsten light bulb filament may operate at 2900
scales have the same numerical value?
K. What is its Fahrenheit temperature? What is this
on the Celsius scale?
13.2Thermal Expansion of Solids and
5. The surface temperature of the Sun is about 5750
Liquids
K. What is this temperature on the Fahrenheit
scale? 9. The height of the Washington Monument is
6. One of the hottest temperatures ever recorded on measured to be 170 m on a day when the
the surface of Earth was in Death Valley, CA. temperature is . What will its height be on a
What is this temperature in Celsius degrees? What day when the temperature falls to ?
is this temperature in Kelvin? Although the monument is made of limestone,
assume that its thermal coefficient of expansion is
the same as marble’s.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 591
13 • Problems & Exercises 573
10. How much taller does the Eiffel Tower become at 19. A physicist makes a cup of instant coffee and
the end of a day when the temperature has notices that, as the coffee cools, its level drops
increased by ? Its original height is 321 m 3.00 mm in the glass cup. Show that this decrease
and you can assume it is made of steel. cannot be due to thermal contraction by
11. What is the change in length of a 3.00-cm-long calculating the decrease in level if the of
column of mercury if its temperature changes coffee is in a 7.00-cm-diameter cup and
from to , assuming the mercury is decreases in temperature from to
unconstrained? (Most of the drop in level is actually due to
12. How large an expansion gap should be left escaping bubbles of air.)
between steel railroad rails if they may reach a 20. (a) The density of water at is very nearly
maximum temperature greater than when (it is actually ),
they were laid? Their original length is 10.0 m. whereas the density of ice at is .
13. You are looking to purchase a small piece of land Calculate the pressure necessary to keep ice from
in Hong Kong. The price is “only” $60,000 per expanding when it freezes, neglecting the effect
square meter! The land title says the dimensions such a large pressure would have on the freezing
are By how much would the total temperature. (This problem gives you only an
price change if you measured the parcel with a indication of how large the forces associated with
steel tape measure on a day when the freezing water might be.) (b) What are the
temperature was above normal? implications of this result for biological cells that
14. Global warming will produce rising sea levels are frozen?
partly due to melting ice caps but also due to the 21. Show that by calculating the change in
expansion of water as average ocean volume of a cube with sides of length
temperatures rise. To get some idea of the size of
this effect, calculate the change in length of a 13.3The Ideal Gas Law
column of water 1.00 km high for a temperature
22. The gauge pressure in your car tires is
increase of Note that this calculation is
at a temperature of
only approximate because ocean warming is not
when you drive it onto a ferry boat to Alaska. What
uniform with depth.
is their gauge pressure later, when their
15. Show that 60.0 L of gasoline originally at
temperature has dropped to ?
will expand to 61.1 L when it warms to as
claimed inExample 13.4. 23. Convert an absolute pressure of
16. (a) Suppose a meter stick made of steel and one to gauge pressure in (This value was stated
made of invar (an alloy of iron and nickel) are the to be just less than inExample 13.9. Is
same length at . What is their difference in it?)
length at ? (b) Repeat the calculation for 24. Suppose a gas-filled incandescent light bulb is
two 30.0-m-long surveyor’s tapes. manufactured so that the gas inside the bulb is at
17. (a) If a 500-mL glass beaker is filled to the brim atmospheric pressure when the bulb has a
with ethyl alcohol at a temperature of how temperature of . (a) Find the gauge
much will overflow when its temperature reaches pressure inside such a bulb when it is hot,
? (b) How much less water would overflow assuming its average temperature is (an
under the same conditions? approximation) and neglecting any change in
18. Most automobiles have a coolant reservoir to volume due to thermal expansion or gas leaks. (b)
catch radiator fluid that may overflow when the The actual final pressure for the light bulb will be
engine is hot. A radiator is made of copper and is less than calculated in part (a) because the glass
filled to its 16.0-L capacity when at What bulb will expand. What will the actual final
volume of radiator fluid will overflow when the pressure be, taking this into account? Is this a
radiator and fluid reach their operating negligible difference?
temperature, given that the fluid’s volume
coefficient of expansion is × ?
Note that this coefficient is approximate, because
most car radiators have operating temperatures of
greater than
PAGE: 592
574 13 • Problems & Exercises
25. To test a balloon, it is placed in a lab and filled 34. A high-pressure gas cylinder contains 50.0 L of
with helium. The temperature of the helium is toxic gas at a pressure of and a
and the pressure is 1.00 atmosphere. The temperature of . Its valve leaks after the
pressure in the lab is maintained. Assume the cylinder is dropped. The cylinder is cooled to dry
membrane of the balloon provides a negligible ice temperature to reduce the leak rate
inward pressure, so it is not considered significant. and pressure so that it can be safely repaired. (a)
(a) What is the pressure inside the balloon if the What is the final pressure in the tank, assuming a
helium is replaced with helium that is at ? negligible amount of gas leaks while being cooled
and the balloon is filled until it has a volume of and that there is no phase change? (b) What is the
20.0 times its original volume? (b) What is the final pressure if one-tenth of the gas escapes? (c)
gauge pressure? (Assume the pressure in the lab To what temperature must the tank be cooled to
remains at 1.00 atmosphere during the reduce the pressure to 1.00 atm (assuming the
experiment.) gas does not change phase and that there is no
26. Confirm that the units of are those of energy leakage during cooling)? (d) Does cooling the tank
for each value of : (a) , (b) appear to be a practical solution?
, and (c) . 35. Find the number of moles in 2.00 L of gas at
27. In the text, it was shown that and under of pressure.
for gas at STP. (a) Show 36. Calculate the depth to which Avogadro’s number
that this quantity is equivalent to of table tennis balls would cover Earth. Each ball
as stated. (b) About has a diameter of 3.75 cm. Assume the space
how many atoms are there in one (a cubic between balls adds an extra 25.0% to their
micrometer) at STP? (c) What does your answer to volume and assume they are not crushed by their
part (b) imply about the separation of atoms and own weight.
molecules? 37. (a) What is the gauge pressure in a car tire
28. Calculate the number of moles in the 2.00-L containing 3.60 mol of gas in a 30.0 L volume? (b)
volume of air in the lungs of the average person. What will its gauge pressure be if you add 1.00 L
Note that the air is at (body temperature). of gas originally at atmospheric pressure and
29. An airplane passenger has of air in his ? Assume the temperature returns to
stomach just before the plane takes off from a and the volume remains constant.
sea-level airport. What volume will the air have at 38. (a) In the deep space between galaxies, the
cruising altitude if cabin pressure drops to density of atoms is as low as and
the temperature is a frigid 2.7 K. What is the
30. (a) What is the volume (in ) of Avogadro’s pressure? (b) What volume (in ) is occupied by
number of sand grains if each grain is a cube and 1 mol of gas? (c) If this volume is a cube, what is
has sides that are 1.0 mm long? (b) How many the length of its sides in kilometers?
kilometers of beaches in length would this cover if
the beach averages 100 m in width and 10.0 m in 13.4Kinetic Theory: Atomic and Molecular
depth? Neglect air spaces between grains. Explanation of Pressure and Temperature
31. An expensive vacuum system can achieve a
39. Some incandescent light bulbs are filled with
pressure as low as at .
argon gas. What is for argon atoms near the
How many atoms are there in a cubic centimeter
filament, assuming their temperature is 2500 K?
at this pressure and temperature?
40. Average atomic and molecular speeds are
32. The number density of gas atoms at a certain
large, even at low temperatures. What is for
location in the space above our planet is about
helium atoms at 5.00 K, just one degree above
and the pressure is
helium’s liquefaction temperature?
in this space. What is the
41. (a) What is the average kinetic energy in joules of
temperature there?
hydrogen atoms on the surface of the
33. A bicycle tire has a pressure of
Sun? (b) What is the average kinetic energy of
at a temperature of and contains 2.00 L of
helium atoms in a region of the solar corona where
gas. What will its pressure be if you let out an
the temperature is ?
amount of air that has a volume of at
atmospheric pressure? Assume tire temperature
and volume remain constant.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 593
13 • Problems & Exercises 575
42. The escape velocity of any object from Earth is 50. (a) What is the vapor pressure of water at ?
11.2 km/s. (a) Express this speed in m/s and km/ (b) What percentage of atmospheric pressure
h. (b) At what temperature would oxygen does this correspond to? (c) What percent of
molecules (molecular mass is equal to 32.0 g/ air is water vapor if it has 100% relative
mol) have an average velocity equal to humidity? (The density of dry air at is
Earth’s escape velocity of 11.1 km/s? .)
43. The escape velocity from the Moon is much 51. Pressure cookers increase cooking speed by
smaller than from Earth and is only 2.38 km/s. At raising the boiling temperature of water above its
what temperature would hydrogen molecules value at atmospheric pressure. (a) What pressure
(molecular mass is equal to 2.016 g/mol) have an is necessary to raise the boiling point to ?
average velocity equal to the Moon’s escape (b) What gauge pressure does this correspond to?
velocity? 52. (a) At what temperature does water boil at an
44. Nuclear fusion, the energy source of the Sun, altitude of 1500 m (about 5000 ft) on a day when
hydrogen bombs, and fusion reactors, occurs atmospheric pressure is (b)
much more readily when the average kinetic What about at an altitude of 3000 m (about
energy of the atoms is high—that is, at high 10,000 ft) when atmospheric pressure is
temperatures. Suppose you want the atoms in
your fusion experiment to have average kinetic 53. What is the atmospheric pressure on top of Mt.
energies of . What temperature is Everest on a day when water boils there at a
needed? temperature of
45. Suppose that the average velocity of 54. At a spot in the high Andes, water boils at ,
carbon dioxide molecules (molecular mass is greatly reducing the cooking speed of potatoes,
equal to 44.0 g/mol) in a flame is found to be for example. What is atmospheric pressure at this
. What temperature does this location?
represent? 55. What is the relative humidity on a day
46. Hydrogen molecules (molecular mass is equal to when the air contains of water vapor?
2.016 g/mol) have an average velocity equal 56. What is the density of water vapor in on a
to 193 m/s. What is the temperature? hot dry day in the desert when the temperature is
47. Much of the gas near the Sun is atomic hydrogen. and the relative humidity is 6.00%?
Its temperature would have to be for 57. A deep-sea diver should breathe a gas mixture
the average velocity to equal the escape that has the same oxygen partial pressure as at
velocity from the Sun. What is that velocity? sea level, where dry air contains 20.9% oxygen
48. There are two important isotopes of uranium— and has a total pressure of . (a)
and ; these isotopes are nearly What is the partial pressure of oxygen at sea level?
identical chemically but have different atomic (b) If the diver breathes a gas mixture at a
masses. Only is very useful in nuclear pressure of , what percent
reactors. One of the techniques for separating oxygen should it be to have the same oxygen
them (gas diffusion) is based on the different partial pressure as at sea level?
average velocities of uranium hexafluoride 58. The vapor pressure of water at is
gas, . (a) The molecular masses for . Using the ideal gas law,
and are 349.0 g/mol and 352.0 g/mol, calculate the density of water vapor in that
respectively. What is the ratio of their average creates a partial pressure equal to this vapor
velocities? (b) At what temperature would their pressure. The result should be the same as the
average velocities differ by 1.00 m/s? (c) Do your saturation vapor density at that temperature
answers in this problem imply that this technique
may be difficult? 59. Air in human lungs has a temperature of
and a saturation vapor density of . (a) If
13.6Humidity, Evaporation, and Boiling
2.00 L of air is exhaled and very dry air inhaled,
what is the maximum loss of water vapor by the
49. Dry air is 78.1% nitrogen. What is the partial
person? (b) Calculate the partial pressure of water
pressure of nitrogen when the atmospheric
vapor having this density, and compare it with the
pressure is ?
vapor pressure of .
PAGE: 594
576 13 • Problems & Exercises
60. If the relative humidity is 90.0% on a muggy 67. Integrated Concepts
summer morning when the temperature is , To get an idea of the small effect that temperature
what will it be later in the day when the has on Archimedes’ principle, calculate the
temperature is , assuming the water vapor fraction of a copper block’s weight that is
density remains constant? supported by the buoyant force in water and
61. Late on an autumn day, the relative humidity is compare this fraction with the fraction supported
45.0% and the temperature is . What will in water.
the relative humidity be that evening when the 68. Integrated Concepts
temperature has dropped to , assuming If you want to cook in water at , you need a
constant water vapor density? pressure cooker that can withstand the necessary
62. Atmospheric pressure atop Mt. Everest is pressure. (a) What pressure is required for the
× . (a) What is the partial pressure boiling point of water to be this high? (b) If the lid
of the pressure cooker is a disk 25.0 cm in
of oxygen there if it is 20.9% of the air? (b) What
diameter, what force must it be able to withstand
percent oxygen should a mountain climber
at this pressure?
breathe so that its partial pressure is the same as
69. Unreasonable Results
at sea level, where atmospheric pressure is
(a) How many moles per cubic meter of an ideal
(c) One of the most severe
gas are there at a pressure of
problems for those climbing very high mountains
and at ? (b) What is unreasonable about this
is the extreme drying of breathing passages. Why
result? (c) Which premise or assumption is
does this drying occur?
responsible?
63. What is the dew point (the temperature at which
70. Unreasonable Results
100% relative humidity would occur) on a day
(a) An automobile mechanic claims that an
when relative humidity is 39.0% at a temperature
aluminum rod fits loosely into its hole on an
of ?
aluminum engine block because the engine is hot
64. On a certain day, the temperature is and
and the rod is cold. If the hole is 10.0% bigger in
the relative humidity is 90.0%. How many grams
diameter than the rod, at what
of water must condense out of each cubic meter
temperature will the rod be the same size as the
of air if the temperature falls to ? Such a
hole? (b) What is unreasonable about this
drop in temperature can, thus, produce heavy dew
temperature? (c) Which premise is responsible?
or fog.
71. Unreasonable Results
65. Integrated Concepts
The temperature inside a supernova explosion is
The boiling point of water increases with depth
said to be . (a) What would the
because pressure increases with depth. At what
average velocity of hydrogen atoms be? (b)
depth will fresh water have a boiling point of
What is unreasonable about this velocity? (c)
, if the surface of the water is at sea level?
Which premise or assumption is responsible?
66. Integrated Concepts
72. Unreasonable Results
(a) At what depth in fresh water is the critical
Suppose the relative humidity is 80% on a day
pressure of water reached, given that the surface
when the temperature is . (a) What will the
is at sea level? (b) At what temperature will this
relative humidity be if the air cools to and
water boil? (c) Is a significantly higher
the vapor density remains constant? (b) What is
temperature needed to boil water at a greater
unreasonable about this result? (c) Which premise
depth?
is responsible?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 595
CHAPTER 14
Heat and Heat Transfer Methods
FIGURE14.1Eunice Newton Foote was the first to determine the relationship between carbon dioxide, water vapor, and the potential for
global heating. She designed and conducted a number of experiments to uncover the ability of different gases to trap heat, describing what
would later be referred to as greenhouse gases. (credit: Carlyn Iverson, NOAA Climate.gov)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
14.1Heat
14.2Temperature Change and Heat Capacity
14.3Phase Change and Latent Heat
14.4Heat Transfer Methods
14.5Conduction
14.6Convection
14.7Radiation
INTRODUCTION TO HEAT AND HEAT TRANSFER METHODS Energy can exist in many forms and heat is one of the
most intriguing. Heat is often hidden, as it only exists when in transit, and is transferred by a number of distinctly
different methods. Heat transfer touches every aspect of our lives and helps us understand how the universe
functions. It explains the chill we feel on a clear breezy night, or why Earth’s core has yet to cool. This chapter
defines and explores heat transfer, its effects, and the methods by which heat is transferred. These topics are
fundamental, as well as practical, and will often be referred to in the chapters ahead.
14.1 Heat
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define heat as transfer of energy.
InWork, Energy, and Energy Resources, we defined work as force times distance and learned that work done on an
object changes its kinetic energy. We also saw inTemperature, Kinetic Theory, and the Gas Lawsthat temperature is
proportional to the (average) kinetic energy of atoms and molecules. We say that a thermal system has a certain
PAGE: 596
578 14 • Heat and Heat Transfer Methods
internal energy: its internal energy is higher if the temperature is higher. If two objects at different temperatures are
brought in contact with each other, energy is transferred from the hotter to the colder object until equilibrium is
reached and the bodies reach thermal equilibrium (i.e., they are at the same temperature). No work is done by either
object, because no force acts through a distance. The transfer of energy is caused by the temperature difference,
and ceases once the temperatures are equal. These observations lead to the following definition ofheat: Heat is the
spontaneous transfer of energy due to a temperature difference.
As noted inTemperature, Kinetic Theory, and the Gas Laws, heat is often confused with temperature. For example,
we may say the heat was unbearable, when we actually mean that the temperature was high. Heat is a form of
energy, whereas temperature is not. The misconception arises because we are sensitive to the flow of heat, rather
than the temperature.
Owing to the fact that heat is a form of energy, it has the SI unit ofjoule(J). Thecalorie(cal) is a common unit of
energy, defined as the energy needed to change the temperature of 1.00 g of water by —specifically,
between and , since there is a slight temperature dependence. Perhaps the most common unit of
heat is thekilocalorie(kcal), which is the energy needed to change the temperature of 1.00 kg of water by .
Since mass is most often specified in kilograms, kilocalorie is commonly used. Food calories (given the notation Cal,
and sometimes called “big calorie”) are actually kilocalories ( ), a fact not easily
determined from package labeling.
FIGURE14.2In figure (a) the soft drink and the ice have different temperatures, and , and are not in thermal equilibrium. In figure
(b), when the soft drink and ice are allowed to interact, energy is transferred until they reach the same temperature , achieving
equilibrium. Heat transfer occurs due to the difference in temperatures. In fact, since the soft drink and ice are both in contact with the
surrounding air and bench, the equilibrium temperature will be the same for both.
Mechanical Equivalent of Heat
It is also possible to change the temperature of a substance by doing work. Work can transfer energy into or out of a
system. This realization helped establish the fact that heat is a form of energy. James Prescott Joule (1818–1889)
performed many experiments to establish themechanical equivalent of heat—the work needed to produce the
same effects as heat transfer. In terms of the units used for these two terms, the best modern value for this
equivalence is
14.1
We consider this equation as the conversion between two different units of energy.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 597
14.2 • Temperature Change and Heat Capacity 579
FIGURE14.3Schematic depiction of Joule’s experiment that established the equivalence of heat and work.
The figure above shows one of Joule’s most famous experimental setups for demonstrating the mechanical
equivalent of heat. It demonstrated that work and heat can produce the same effects, and helped establish the
principle of conservation of energy. Gravitational potential energy (PE) (work done by the gravitational force) is
converted into kinetic energy (KE), and then randomized by viscosity and turbulence into increased average kinetic
energy of atoms and molecules in the system, producing a temperature increase. His contributions to the field of
thermodynamics were so significant that the SI unit of energy was named after him.
Heat added or removed from a system changes its internal energy and thus its temperature. Such a temperature
increase is observed while cooking. However, adding heat does not necessarily increase the temperature. An
example is melting of ice; that is, when a substance changes from one phase to another. Work done on the system or
by the system can also change the internal energy of the system. Joule demonstrated that the temperature of a
system can be increased by stirring. If an ice cube is rubbed against a rough surface, work is done by the frictional
force. A system has a well-defined internal energy, but we cannot say that it has a certain “heat content” or “work
content”. We use the phrase “heat transfer” to emphasize its nature.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Two samples (A and B) of the same substance are kept in a lab. Someone adds 10 kilojoules (kJ) of heat to one
sample, while 10 kJ of work is done on the other sample. How can you tell to which sample the heat was added?
Solution
Heat and work both change the internal energy of the substance. However, the properties of the sample only depend
on the internal energy so that it is impossible to tell whether heat was added to sample A or B.
14.2 Temperature Change and Heat Capacity
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Observe heat transfer and change in temperature and mass.
• Calculate final temperature after heat transfer between two objects.
One of the major effects of heat transfer is temperature change: heating increases the temperature while cooling
decreases it. We assume that there is no phase change and that no work is done on or by the system. Experiments
show that the transferred heat depends on three factors—the change in temperature, the mass of the system, and
the substance and phase of the substance.
PAGE: 598
580 14 • Heat and Heat Transfer Methods
FIGURE14.4The heat transferred to cause a temperature change depends on the magnitude of the temperature change, the mass of
the system, and the substance and phase involved. (a) The amount of heat transferred is directly proportional to the temperature change.
To double the temperature change of a mass , you need to add twice the heat. (b) The amount of heat transferred is also directly
proportional to the mass. To cause an equivalent temperature change in a doubled mass, you need to add twice the heat. (c) The amount of
heat transferred depends on the substance and its phase. If it takes an amount of heat to cause a temperature change in a given
mass of copper, it will take 10.8 times that amount of heat to cause the equivalent temperature change in the same mass of water
assuming no phase change in either substance.
The dependence on temperature change and mass are easily understood. Owing to the fact that the (average)
kinetic energy of an atom or molecule is proportional to the absolute temperature, the internal energy of a system is
proportional to the absolute temperature and the number of atoms or molecules. Owing to the fact that the
transferred heat is equal to the change in the internal energy, the heat is proportional to the mass of the substance
and the temperature change. The transferred heat also depends on the substance so that, for example, the heat
necessary to raise the temperature is less for alcohol than for water. For the same substance, the transferred heat
also depends on the phase (gas, liquid, or solid).
Heat Transfer and Temperature Change
The quantitative relationship between heat transfer and temperature change contains all three factors:
14.2
where is the symbol for heat transfer, is the mass of the substance, and is the change in temperature.
The symbol stands forspecific heatand depends on the material and phase. The specific heat is the amount
of heat necessary to change the temperature of 1.00 kg of mass by . The specific heat is a property of
the substance; its SI unit is or Recall that the temperature change is the same in
units of kelvin and degrees Celsius. If heat transfer is measured in kilocalories, thenthe unit of specific heatis
Values of specific heat must generally be looked up in tables, because there is no simple way to calculate them. In
general, the specific heat also depends on the temperature.Table 14.1lists representative values of specific heat
for various substances. Except for gases, the temperature and volume dependence of the specific heat of most
substances is weak. We see from this table that the specific heat of water is five times that of glass and ten times
that of iron, which means that it takes five times as much heat to raise the temperature of water the same amount
as for glass and ten times as much heat to raise the temperature of water as for iron. In fact, water has one of the
largest specific heats of any material, which is important for sustaining life on Earth.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 599
14.2 • Temperature Change and Heat Capacity 581
EXAMPLE 14.1
Calculating the Required Heat: Heating Water in an Aluminum Pan
A 0.500 kg aluminum pan on a stove is used to heat 0.250 liters of water from to . (a) How much heat
is required? What percentage of the heat is used to raise the temperature of (b) the pan and (c) the water?
Strategy
The pan and the water are always at the same temperature. When you put the pan on the stove, the temperature of
the water and the pan is increased by the same amount. We use the equation for the heat transfer for the given
temperature change and mass of water and aluminum. The specific heat values for water and aluminum are given in
Table 14.1.
Solution
Because water is in thermal contact with the aluminum, the pan and the water are at the same temperature.
1. Calculate the temperature difference:
14.3
2. Calculate the mass of water. Because the density of water is , one liter of water has a mass of 1 kg,
and the mass of 0.250 liters of water is .
3. Calculate the heat transferred to the water. Use the specific heat of water inTable 14.1:
14.4
4. Calculate the heat transferred to the aluminum. Use the specific heat for aluminum inTable 14.1:
14.5
5. Compare the percentage of heat going into the pan versus that going into the water. First, find the total
transferred heat:
14.6
Thus, the amount of heat going into heating the pan is
14.7
and the amount going into heating the water is
14.8
Discussion
In this example, the heat transferred to the container is a significant fraction of the total transferred heat. Although
the mass of the pan is twice that of the water, the specific heat of water is over four times greater than that of
aluminum. Therefore, it takes a bit more than twice the heat to achieve the given temperature change for the water
as compared to the aluminum pan.
PAGE: 600
582 14 • Heat and Heat Transfer Methods
FIGURE14.5The smoking brakes on this truck are a visible evidence of the mechanical equivalent of heat.
EXAMPLE 14.2
Calculating the Temperature Increase from the Work Done on a Substance: Truck Brakes
Overheat on Downhill Runs
Truck brakes used to control speed on a downhill run do work, converting gravitational potential energy into
increased internal energy (higher temperature) of the brake material. This conversion prevents the gravitational
potential energy from being converted into kinetic energy of the truck. The problem is that the mass of the truck is
large compared with that of the brake material absorbing the energy, and the temperature increase may occur too
fast for sufficient heat to transfer from the brakes to the environment.
Calculate the temperature increase of 100 kg of brake material with an average specific heat of if the
material retains 10% of the energy from a 10,000-kg truck descending 75.0 m (in vertical displacement) at a
constant speed.
Strategy
If the brakes are not applied, gravitational potential energy is converted into kinetic energy. When brakes are
applied, gravitational potential energy is converted into internal energy of the brake material. We first calculate the
gravitational potential energy that the entire truck loses in its descent and then find the temperature
increase produced in the brake material alone.
Solution
1. Calculate the change in gravitational potential energy as the truck goes downhill
14.9
2. Calculate the temperature from the heat transferred using and
14.10
where is the mass of the brake material. Insert the values and to find
14.11
Discussion
This same idea underlies the recent hybrid technology of cars, where mechanical energy (gravitational potential
energy) is converted by the brakes into electrical energy (battery).
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 601
14.2 • Temperature Change and Heat Capacity 583
Substances Specific heat(c)
1
Solids J(kg°C) kcal(kg°C)
Aluminum 900 0.215
Asbestos 800 0.19
Concrete, granite (average) 840 0.20
Copper 387 0.0924
Glass 840 0.20
Gold 129 0.0308
Human body (average at 37 °C) 3500 0.83
Ice (average, -50°C to 0°C) 2090 0.50
Iron, steel 452 0.108
Lead 128 0.0305
Silver 235 0.0562
Wood 1700 0.4
Liquids
Benzene 1740 0.415
Ethanol 2450 0.586
Glycerin 2410 0.576
Mercury 139 0.0333
Water (15.0 °C) 4186 1.000
2
Gases
Air (dry) 721 (1015) 0.172 (0.242)
Ammonia 1670 (2190) 0.399 (0.523)
Carbon dioxide 638 (833) 0.152 (0.199)
Nitrogen 739 (1040) 0.177 (0.248)
1 These values are identical in units of .
2 at constant volume and at , except as noted, and at 1.00 atm average pressure. Values in parentheses are at a constant
PAGE: 602
584 14 • Heat and Heat Transfer Methods
Substances Specific heat(c)
Oxygen 651 (913) 0.156 (0.218)
Steam (100°C) 1520 (2020) 0.363 (0.482)
TABLE14.1Specific Heats 3 of Various Substances
Note thatExample 14.2is an illustration of the mechanical equivalent of heat. Alternatively, the temperature
increase could be produced by a blow torch instead of mechanically.
EXAMPLE 14.3
Calculating the Final Temperature When Heat Is Transferred Between Two Bodies: Pouring
Cold Water in a Hot Pan
Suppose you pour 0.250 kg of water (about a cup) into a 0.500-kg aluminum pan off the stove with a
temperature of . Assume that the pan is placed on an insulated pad and that a negligible amount of water
boils off. What is the temperature when the water and pan reach thermal equilibrium a short time later?
Strategy
The pan is placed on an insulated pad so that little heat transfer occurs with the surroundings. Originally the pan and
water are not in thermal equilibrium: the pan is at a higher temperature than the water. Heat transfer then restores
thermal equilibrium once the water and pan are in contact. Because heat transfer between the pan and water takes
place rapidly, the mass of evaporated water is negligible and the magnitude of the heat lost by the pan is equal to
the heat gained by the water. The exchange of heat stops once a thermal equilibrium between the pan and the water
is achieved. The heat exchange can be written as .
Solution
1. Use the equation for heat transfer to express the heat lost by the aluminum pan in terms of the
mass of the pan, the specific heat of aluminum, the initial temperature of the pan, and the final temperature:
14.12
2. Express the heat gained by the water in terms of the mass of the water, the specific heat of water, the initial
temperature of the water and the final temperature:
14.13
3. Note that and and that they must sum to zero because the heat lost by the hot pan must be
the same as the heat gained by the cold water:
14.14
4. Bring all terms involving on the left hand side and all other terms on the right hand side. Solve for ,
14.15
and insert the numerical values:
14.16
pressure of 1.00 atm.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 603
14.3 • Phase Change and Latent Heat 585
Discussion
This is a typicalcalorimetryproblem—two bodies at different temperatures are brought in contact with each other
and exchange heat until a common temperature is reached. Why is the final temperature so much closer to
than ? The reason is that water has a greater specific heat than most common substances and thus undergoes
a small temperature change for a given heat transfer. A large body of water, such as a lake, requires a large amount
of heat to increase its temperature appreciably. This explains why the temperature of a lake stays relatively constant
during a day even when the temperature change of the air is large. However, the water temperature does change
over longer times (e.g., summer to winter).
Take-Home Experiment: Temperature Change of Land and Water
What heats faster, land or water?
To study differences in heat capacity:
• Place equal masses of dry sand (or soil) and water at the same temperature into two small jars. (The
average density of soil or sand is about 1.6 times that of water, so you can achieve approximately equal
masses by using more water by volume.)
• Heat both (using an oven or a heat lamp) for the same amount of time.
• Record the final temperature of the two masses.
• Now bring both jars to the same temperature by heating for a longer period of time.
• Remove the jars from the heat source and measure their temperature every 5 minutes for about 30
minutes.
Which sample cools off the fastest? This activity replicates the phenomena responsible for land breezes and sea
breezes.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
If 25 kJ is necessary to raise the temperature of a block from to , how much heat is necessary to heat the
block from to ?
Solution
The heat transfer depends only on the temperature difference. Since the temperature differences are the same in
both cases, the same 25 kJ is necessary in the second case.
14.3 Phase Change and Latent Heat
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Examine heat transfer.
• Calculate final temperature from heat transfer.
So far we have discussed temperature change due to heat transfer. No temperature change occurs from heat
transfer if ice melts and becomes liquid water (i.e., during a phase change). For example, consider water dripping
from icicles melting on a roof warmed by the Sun. Conversely, water freezes in an ice tray cooled by lower-
temperature surroundings.
PAGE: 604
586 14 • Heat and Heat Transfer Methods
FIGURE14.6Heat from the air transfers to the ice causing it to melt. (credit: Mike Brand)
Energy is required to melt a solid because the cohesive bonds between the molecules in the solid must be broken
apart such that, in the liquid, the molecules can move around at comparable kinetic energies; thus, there is no rise in
temperature. Similarly, energy is needed to vaporize a liquid, because molecules in a liquid interact with each other
via attractive forces. There is no temperature change until a phase change is complete. The temperature of a cup of
soda initially at stays at until all the ice has melted. Conversely, energy is released during freezing and
condensation, usually in the form of thermal energy. Work is done by cohesive forces when molecules are brought
together. The corresponding energy must be given off (dissipated) to allow them to stay togetherFigure 14.7.
The energy involved in a phase change depends on two major factors: the number and strength of bonds or force
pairs. The number of bonds is proportional to the number of molecules and thus to the mass of the sample. The
strength of forces depends on the type of molecules. The heat required to change the phase of a sample of mass
is given by
14.17
14.18
where the latent heat of fusion, , and latent heat of vaporization, , are material constants that are determined
experimentally. See (Table 14.2).
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 605
14.3 • Phase Change and Latent Heat 587
FIGURE14.7(a) Energy is required to partially overcome the attractive forces between molecules in a solid to form a liquid. That same
energy must be removed for freezing to take place. (b) Molecules are separated by large distances when going from liquid to vapor,
requiring significant energy to overcome molecular attraction. The same energy must be removed for condensation to take place. There is
no temperature change until a phase change is complete.
Latent heat is measured in units of J/kg. Both and depend on the substance, particularly on the strength of its
molecular forces as noted earlier. and are collectively calledlatent heat coefficients. They arelatent, or
hidden, because in phase changes, energy enters or leaves a system without causing a temperature change in the
system; so, in effect, the energy is hidden.Table 14.2lists representative values of and , together with
melting and boiling points.
The table shows that significant amounts of energy are involved in phase changes. Let us look, for example, at how
much energy is needed to melt a kilogram of ice at to produce a kilogram of water at . Using the equation for
a change in temperature and the value for water fromTable 14.2, we find that
is the energy to melt a kilogram of ice. This is a lot of energy as it
represents the same amount of energy needed to raise the temperature of 1 kg of liquid water from to .
Even more energy is required to vaporize water; it would take 2256 kJ to change 1 kg of liquid water at the normal
boiling point ( at atmospheric pressure) to steam (water vapor). This example shows that the energy for a
phase change is enormous compared to energy associated with temperature changes without a phase change.
L L
f v
Substance Melting point (ºC) kJ/kg kcal/kg Boiling point (°C) kJ/kg kcal/kg
Helium −269.7 5.23 1.25 −268.9 20.9 4.99
Hydrogen −259.3 58.6 14.0 −252.9 452 108
TABLE14.2Heats of Fusion and Vaporization 6
6 Values quoted at the normal melting and boiling temperatures at standard atmospheric pressure (1 atm).
PAGE: 606
588 14 • Heat and Heat Transfer Methods
L L
f v
Nitrogen −210.0 25.5 6.09 −195.8 201 48.0
Oxygen −218.8 13.8 3.30 −183.0 213 50.9
Ethanol −114 104 24.9 78.3 854 204
Ammonia −75 108 −33.4 1370 327
Mercury −38.9 11.8 2.82 357 272 65.0
4 5
Water 0.00 334 79.8 100.0 2430 580
Sulfur 119 38.1 9.10 444.6 326 77.9
Lead 327 24.5 5.85 1750 871 208
Antimony 631 165 39.4 1440 561 134
Aluminum 660 380 90 2450 11400 2720
Silver 961 88.3 21.1 2193 2336 558
Gold 1063 64.5 15.4 2660 1578 377
Copper 1083 134 32.0 2595 5069 1211
Uranium 1133 84 20 3900 1900 454
Tungsten 3410 184 44 5900 4810 1150
TABLE14.2Heats of Fusion and Vaporization 6
Phase changes can have a tremendous stabilizing effect even on temperatures that are not near the melting and
boiling points, because evaporation and condensation (conversion of a gas into a liquid state) occur even at
temperatures below the boiling point. Take, for example, the fact that air temperatures in humid climates rarely go
above , which is because most heat transfer goes into evaporating water into the air. Similarly, temperatures
in humid weather rarely fall below the dew point because enormous heat is released when water vapor condenses.
We examine the effects of phase change more precisely by considering adding heat into a sample of ice at
(Figure 14.8). The temperature of the ice rises linearly, absorbing heat at a constant rate of until it
reaches . Once at this temperature, the ice begins to melt until all the ice has melted, absorbing 79.8 cal/g of
heat. The temperature remains constant at during this phase change. Once all the ice has melted, the
temperature of the liquid water rises, absorbing heat at a new constant rate of . At , the water
begins to boil and the temperature again remains constant while the water absorbs 539 cal/g of heat during this
phase change. When all the liquid has become steam vapor, the temperature rises again, absorbing heat at a rate of
.
4 At (body temperature), the heat of vaporization for water is 2430 kJ/kg or 580 kcal/kg
5 At (body temperature), the heat of vaporization for water is 2430 kJ/kg or 580 kcal/kg
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 607
14.3 • Phase Change and Latent Heat 589
FIGURE14.8A graph of temperature versus energy added. The system is constructed so that no vapor evaporates while ice warms to
become liquid water, and so that, when vaporization occurs, the vapor remains in of the system. The long stretches of constant temperature
values at and reflect the large latent heat of melting and vaporization, respectively.
Water can evaporate at temperatures below the boiling point. More energy is required than at the boiling point,
because the kinetic energy of water molecules at temperatures below is less than that at , hence less
energy is available from random thermal motions. Take, for example, the fact that, at body temperature, perspiration
from the skin requires a heat input of 2428 kJ/kg, which is about 10 percent higher than the latent heat of
vaporization at . This heat comes from the skin, and thus provides an effective cooling mechanism in hot
weather. High humidity inhibits evaporation, so that body temperature might rise, leaving unevaporated sweat on
your brow.
EXAMPLE 14.4
Calculate Final Temperature from Phase Change: Cooling Soda with Ice Cubes
Three ice cubes are used to chill a soda at with mass . The ice is at and each ice cube has
a mass of 6.0 g. Assume that the soda is kept in a foam container so that heat loss can be ignored. Assume the soda
has the same heat capacity as water. Find the final temperature when all ice has melted.
Strategy
The ice cubes are at the melting temperature of . Heat is transferred from the soda to the ice for melting. Melting
of ice occurs in two steps: first the phase change occurs and solid (ice) transforms into liquid water at the melting
temperature, then the temperature of this water rises. Melting yields water at , so more heat is transferred from
the soda to this water until the water plus soda system reaches thermal equilibrium,
14.19
The heat transferred to the ice is . The heat given off by the soda is
. Since no heat is lost, , so that
14.20
Bring all terms involving on the left-hand-side and all other terms on the right-hand-side. Solve for the unknown
quantity :
14.21
Solution
1. Identify the known quantities. The mass of ice is and the mass of soda is
.
PAGE: 608
590 14 • Heat and Heat Transfer Methods
2. Calculate the terms in the numerator:
14.22
and
14.23
3. Calculate the denominator:
14.24
4. Calculate the final temperature:
14.25
Discussion
This example illustrates the enormous energies involved during a phase change. The mass of ice is about 7 percent
the mass of water but leads to a noticeable change in the temperature of soda. Although we assumed that the ice
was at the freezing temperature, this is incorrect: the typical temperature is . However, this correction gives a
final temperature that is essentially identical to the result we found. Can you explain why?
We have seen that vaporization requires heat transfer to a liquid from the surroundings, so that energy is released
by the surroundings. Condensation is the reverse process, increasing the temperature of the surroundings. This
increase may seem surprising, since we associate condensation with cold objects—the glass in the figure, for
example. However, energy must be removed from the condensing molecules to make a vapor condense. The energy
is exactly the same as that required to make the phase change in the other direction, from liquid to vapor, and so it
can be calculated from .
FIGURE14.9Condensation forms on this glass of iced tea because the temperature of the nearby air is reduced to below the dew point.
The rate at which water molecules join together exceeds the rate at which they separate, and so water condenses. Energy is released when
the water condenses, speeding the melting of the ice in the glass. (credit: Jenny Downing)
Real-World Application
Energy is also released when a liquid freezes. This phenomenon is used by fruit growers in Florida to protect
oranges when the temperature is close to the freezing point . Growers spray water on the plants in
orchards so that the water freezes and heat is released to the growing oranges on the trees. This prevents the
temperature inside the orange from dropping below freezing, which would damage the fruit.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 609
14.3 • Phase Change and Latent Heat 591
FIGURE14.10The ice on these trees released large amounts of energy when it froze, helping to prevent the temperature of the trees
from dropping below . Water is intentionally sprayed on orchards to help prevent hard frosts. (credit: Hermann Hammer)
Sublimationis the transition from solid to vapor phase. You may have noticed that snow can disappear into thin air
without a trace of liquid water, or the disappearance of ice cubes in a freezer. The reverse is also true: Frost can form
on very cold windows without going through the liquid stage. A popular effect is the making of “smoke” from dry ice,
which is solid carbon dioxide. Sublimation occurs because the equilibrium vapor pressure of solids is not zero.
Certain air fresheners use the sublimation of a solid to inject a perfume into the room. Moth balls are a slightly toxic
example of a phenol (an organic compound) that sublimates, while some solids, such as osmium tetroxide, are so
toxic that they must be kept in sealed containers to prevent human exposure to their sublimation-produced vapors.
FIGURE14.11Direct transitions between solid and vapor are common, sometimes useful, and even beautiful. (a) Dry ice sublimates
directly to carbon dioxide gas. The visible vapor is made of water droplets. (credit: Windell Oskay) (b) Frost forms patterns on a very cold
window, an example of a solid formed directly from a vapor. (credit: Liz West)
All phase transitions involve heat. In the case of direct solid-vapor transitions, the energy required is given by the
equation , where is theheat of sublimation, which is the energy required to change 1.00 kg of a
substance from the solid phase to the vapor phase. is analogous to and , and its value depends on the
substance. Sublimation requires energy input, so that dry ice is an effective coolant, whereas the reverse process
(i.e., frosting) releases energy. The amount of energy required for sublimation is of the same order of magnitude as
PAGE: 610
592 14 • Heat and Heat Transfer Methods
that for other phase transitions.
The material presented in this section and the preceding section allows us to calculate any number of effects
related to temperature and phase change. In each case, it is necessary to identify which temperature and phase
changes are taking place and then to apply the appropriate equation. Keep in mind that heat transfer and work can
cause both temperature and phase changes.
Problem-Solving Strategies for the Effects of Heat Transfer
1. Examine the situation to determine that there is a change in the temperature or phase. Is there heat transfer
into or out of the system?When the presence or absence of a phase change is not obvious, you may wish to first
solve the problem as if there were no phase changes, and examine the temperature change obtained. If it is
sufficient to take you past a boiling or melting point, you should then go back and do the problem in
steps—temperature change, phase change, subsequent temperature change, and so on.
2. Identify and list all objects that change temperature and phase.
3. Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem (identify the unknowns).A written list is useful.
4. Make a list of what is given or what can be inferred from the problem as stated (identify the knowns).
5. Solve the appropriate equation for the quantity to be determined (the unknown).If there is a temperature
change, the transferred heat depends on the specific heat (seeTable 14.1) whereas, for a phase change, the
transferred heat depends on the latent heat. SeeTable 14.2.
6. Substitute the knowns along with their units into the appropriate equation and obtain numerical solutions
complete with units.You will need to do this in steps if there is more than one stage to the process (such as a
temperature change followed by a phase change).
7. Check the answer to see if it is reasonable: Does it make sense?As an example, be certain that the temperature
change does not also cause a phase change that you have not taken into account.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Why does snow remain on mountain slopes even when daytime temperatures are higher than the freezing
temperature?
Solution
Snow is formed from ice crystals and thus is the solid phase of water. Because enormous heat is necessary for
phase changes, it takes a certain amount of time for this heat to be accumulated from the air, even if the air is above
. The warmer the air is, the faster this heat exchange occurs and the faster the snow melts.
14.4 Heat Transfer Methods
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Discuss the different methods of heat transfer.
Equally as interesting as the effects of heat transfer on a system are the methods by which this occurs. Whenever
there is a temperature difference, heat transfer occurs. Heat transfer may occur rapidly, such as through a cooking
pan, or slowly, such as through the walls of a picnic ice chest. We can control rates of heat transfer by choosing
materials (such as thick wool clothing for the winter), controlling air movement (such as the use of weather stripping
around doors), or by choice of color (such as a white roof to reflect summer sunlight). So many processes involve
heat transfer, so that it is hard to imagine a situation where no heat transfer occurs. Yet every process involving heat
transfer takes place by only three methods:
1. Conductionis heat transfer through stationary matter by physical contact. (The matter is stationary on a
macroscopic scale—we know there is thermal motion of the atoms and molecules at any temperature above
absolute zero.) Heat transferred between the electric burner of a stove and the bottom of a pan is transferred by
conduction.
2. Convectionis the heat transfer by the macroscopic movement of a fluid. This type of transfer takes place in a
forced-air furnace and in weather systems, for example.
3. Heat transfer byradiationoccurs when microwaves, infrared radiation, visible light, or another form of
electromagnetic radiation is emitted or absorbed. An obvious example is the warming of the Earth by the Sun. A
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 611
14.5 • Conduction 593
less obvious example is thermal radiation from the human body.
FIGURE14.12In a fireplace, heat transfer occurs by all three methods: conduction, convection, and radiation. Radiation is responsible for
most of the heat transferred into the room. Heat transfer also occurs through conduction into the room, but at a much slower rate. Heat
transfer by convection also occurs through cold air entering the room around windows and hot air leaving the room by rising up the
chimney.
We examine these methods in some detail in the three following modules. Each method has unique and interesting
characteristics, but all three do have one thing in common: they transfer heat solely because of a temperature
differenceFigure 14.12.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Name an example from daily life (different from the text) for each mechanism of heat transfer.
Solution
Conduction: Heat transfers into your hands as you hold a hot cup of coffee.
Convection: Heat transfers as the barista “steams” cold milk to make hotcocoa.
Radiation: Reheating a cold cup of coffee in a microwave oven.
14.5 Conduction
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Calculate thermal conductivity.
• Observe conduction of heat in collisions.
• Study thermal conductivities of common substances.
PAGE: 612
594 14 • Heat and Heat Transfer Methods
FIGURE14.13Insulation is used to limit the conduction of heat from the inside to the outside (in winters) and from the outside to the
inside (in summers). (credit: Giles Douglas)
Your feet feel cold as you walk barefoot across the living room carpet in your cold house and then step onto the
kitchen tile floor. This result is intriguing, since the carpet and tile floor are both at the same temperature. The
different sensation you feel is explained by the different rates of heat transfer: the heat loss during the same time
interval is greater for skin in contact with the tiles than with the carpet, so the temperature drop is greater on the
tiles.
Some materials conduct thermal energy faster than others. In general, good conductors of electricity (metals like
copper, aluminum, gold, and silver) are also good heat conductors, whereas insulators of electricity (wood, plastic,
and rubber) are poor heat conductors.Figure 14.14shows molecules in two bodies at different temperatures. The
(average) kinetic energy of a molecule in the hot body is higher than in the colder body. If two molecules collide, an
energy transfer from the molecule with greater kinetic energy to the molecule with less kinetic energy occurs. The
cumulative effect from all collisions results in a net flux of heat from the hot body to the colder body. The heat flux
thus depends on the temperature difference . Therefore, you will get a more severe burn from
boiling water than from hot tap water. Conversely, if the temperatures are the same, the net heat transfer rate falls
to zero, and equilibrium is achieved. Owing to the fact that the number of collisions increases with increasing area,
heat conduction depends on the cross-sectional area. If you touch a cold wall with your palm, your hand cools faster
than if you just touch it with your fingertip.
FIGURE14.14The molecules in two bodies at different temperatures have different average kinetic energies. Collisions occurring at the
contact surface tend to transfer energy from high-temperature regions to low-temperature regions. In this illustration, a molecule in the
lower temperature region (right side) has low energy before collision, but its energy increases after colliding with the contact surface. In
contrast, a molecule in the higher temperature region (left side) has high energy before collision, but its energy decreases after colliding
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 613
14.5 • Conduction 595
with the contact surface.
A third factor in the mechanism of conduction is the thickness of the material through which heat transfers. The
figure below shows a slab of material with different temperatures on either side. Suppose that is greater than ,
so that heat is transferred from left to right. Heat transfer from the left side to the right side is accomplished by a
series of molecular collisions. The thicker the material, the more time it takes to transfer the same amount of heat.
This model explains why thick clothing is warmer than thin clothing in winters, and why Arctic mammals protect
themselves with thick blubber.
FIGURE14.15Heat conduction occurs through any material, represented here by a rectangular bar, whether window glass or walrus
blubber. The temperature of the material is on the left and on the right, where is greater than . The rate of heat transfer by
conduction is directly proportional to the surface area , the temperature difference , and the substance’s conductivity . The rate
of heat transfer is inversely proportional to the thickness .
Lastly, the heat transfer rate depends on the material properties described by the coefficient of thermal
conductivity. All four factors are included in a simple equation that was deduced from and is confirmed by
experiments. Therate of conductive heat transferthrough a slab of material, such as the one inFigure 14.15, is
given by
14.26
where is the rate of heat transfer in watts or kilocalories per second, is thethermal conductivityof the
material, and are its surface area and thickness, as shown inFigure 14.15, and is the temperature
difference across the slab.Table 14.3gives representative values of thermal conductivity.
EXAMPLE 14.5
Calculating Heat Transfer Through Conduction: Conduction Rate Through an Ice Box
A Styrofoam ice box has a total area of and walls with an average thickness of 2.50 cm. The box contains
ice, water, and canned beverages at . The inside of the box is kept cold by melting ice. How much ice melts in
one day if the ice box is kept in the trunk of a car at ?
Strategy
This question involves both heat for a phase change (melting of ice) and the transfer of heat by conduction. To find
the amount of ice melted, we must find the net heat transferred. This value can be obtained by calculating the rate
of heat transfer by conduction and multiplying by time.
Solution
1. Identify the knowns.
PAGE: 614
596 14 • Heat and Heat Transfer Methods
14.27
2. Identify the unknowns. We need to solve for the mass of the ice, . We will also need to solve for the net heat
transferred to melt the ice, .
3. Determine which equations to use. The rate of heat transfer by conduction is given by
14.28
4. The heat is used to melt the ice:
5. Insert the known values:
14.29
6. Multiply the rate of heat transfer by the time ( ):
14.30
7. Set this equal to the heat transferred to melt the ice: . Solve for the mass :
14.31
Discussion
The result of 3.44 kg, or about 7.6 lbs, seems about right, based on experience. You might expect to use about a 4
kg (7–10 lb) bag of ice per day. A little extra ice is required if you add any warm food or beverages.
Inspecting the conductivities inTable 14.3shows that Styrofoam is a very poor conductor and thus a good insulator.
Other good insulators include fiberglass, wool, and goose-down feathers. Like Styrofoam, these all incorporate
many small pockets of air, taking advantage of air’s poor thermal conductivity.
Substance Thermal conductivity ⋅ ⋅
Silver 420
Copper 390
Gold 318
Aluminum 220
Steel iron 80
Steel (stainless) 14
Ice 2.2
Glass (average) 0.84
Concrete brick 0.84
TABLE14.3Thermal Conductivities of Common Substances 7
7 At temperatures near 0ºC.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 615
14.5 • Conduction 597
Substance Thermal conductivity ⋅ ⋅
Water 0.6
Fatty tissue (without blood) 0.2
Asbestos 0.16
Plasterboard 0.16
Wood 0.08–0.16
Snow (dry) 0.10
Cork 0.042
Glass wool 0.042
Wool 0.04
Down feathers 0.025
Air 0.023
Styrofoam 0.010
TABLE14.3Thermal Conductivities of Common Substances 7
A combination of material and thickness is often manipulated to develop good insulators—the smaller the
conductivity and the larger the thickness , the better. The ratio of will thus be large for a good insulator. The
ratio is called the factor. The rate of conductive heat transfer is inversely proportional to . The larger the
value of , the better the insulation. factors are most commonly quoted for household insulation, refrigerators,
and the like—unfortunately, it is still in non-metric units of ft2·°F·h/Btu, although the unit usually goes unstated (1
British thermal unit [Btu] is the amount of energy needed to change the temperature of 1.0 lb of water by 1.0 °F). A
couple of representative values are an factor of 11 for 3.5-in-thick fiberglass batts (pieces) of insulation and an
factor of 19 for 6.5-in-thick fiberglass batts. Walls are usually insulated with 3.5-in batts, while ceilings are usually
insulated with 6.5-in batts. In cold climates, thicker batts may be used in ceilings and walls.
FIGURE14.16The fiberglass batt is used for insulation of walls and ceilings to prevent heat transfer between the inside of the building and
the outside environment.
Note that inTable 14.3, the best thermal conductors—silver, copper, gold, and aluminum—are also the best
electrical conductors, again related to the density of free electrons in them. Cooking utensils are typically made
from good conductors.
PAGE: 616
598 14 • Heat and Heat Transfer Methods
EXAMPLE 14.6
Calculating the Temperature Difference Maintained by a Heat Transfer: Conduction Through
an Aluminum Pan
Water is boiling in an aluminum pan placed on an electrical element on a stovetop. The sauce pan has a bottom that
is 0.800 cm thick and 14.0 cm in diameter. The boiling water is evaporating at the rate of 1.00 g/s. What is the
temperature difference across (through) the bottom of the pan?
Strategy
Conduction through the aluminum is the primary method of heat transfer here, and so we use the equation for the
rate of heat transfer and solve for the temperature difference
.
14.32
Solution
1. Identify the knowns and convert them to the SI units.
The thickness of the pan, the area of the pan,
, and the thermal conductivity,
2. Calculate the necessary heat of vaporization of 1 g of water:
14.33
3. Calculate the rate of heat transfer given that 1 g of water melts in one second:
14.34
4. Insert the knowns into the equation and solve for the temperature difference:
14.35
Discussion
The value for the heat transfer is typical for an electric stove. This value gives a
remarkably small temperature difference between the stove and the pan. Consider that the stove burner is red hot
while the inside of the pan is nearly because of its contact with boiling water. This contact effectively cools
the bottom of the pan in spite of its proximity to the very hot stove burner. Aluminum is such a good conductor that it
only takes this small temperature difference to produce a heat transfer of 2.26 kW into the pan.
Conduction is caused by the random motion of atoms and molecules. As such, it is an ineffective mechanism for
heat transport over macroscopic distances and short time distances. Take, for example, the temperature on the
Earth, which would be unbearably cold during the night and extremely hot during the day if heat transport in the
atmosphere was to be only through conduction. In another example, car engines would overheat unless there was a
more efficient way to remove excess heat from the pistons.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
How does the rate of heat transfer by conduction change when all spatial dimensions are doubled?
Solution
Because area is the product of two spatial dimensions, it increases by a factor of four when each dimension is
doubled . The distance, however, simply doubles. Because the temperature
difference and the coefficient of thermal conductivity are independent of the spatial dimensions, the rate of heat
transfer by conduction increases by a factor of four divided by two, or two:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 617
14.6 • Convection 599
14.36
14.6 Convection
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Discuss the method of heat transfer by convection.
Convection is driven by large-scale flow of matter. In the case of Earth, the atmospheric circulation is caused by the
flow of hot air from the tropics to the poles, and the flow of cold air from the poles toward the tropics. (Note that
Earth’s rotation causes the observed easterly flow of air in the northern hemisphere). Car engines are kept cool by
the flow of water in the cooling system, with the water pump maintaining a flow of cool water to the pistons. The
circulatory system is used the body: when the body overheats, the blood vessels in the skin expand (dilate), which
increases the blood flow to the skin where it can be cooled by sweating. These vessels become smaller when it is
cold outside and larger when it is hot (so more fluid flows, and more energy is transferred).
The body also loses a significant fraction of its heat through the breathing process.
While convection is usually more complicated than conduction, we can describe convection and do some
straightforward, realistic calculations of its effects. Natural convection is driven by buoyant forces: hot air rises
because density decreases as temperature increases. The house inFigure 14.17is kept warm in this manner, as is
the pot of water on the stove inFigure 14.18. Ocean currents and large-scale atmospheric circulation transfer
energy from one part of the globe to another. Both are examples of natural convection.
FIGURE14.17Air heated by the so-called gravity furnace expands and rises, forming a convective loop that transfers energy to other parts
of the room. As the air is cooled at the ceiling and outside walls, it contracts, eventually becoming denser than room air and sinking to the
floor. A properly designed heating system using natural convection, like this one, can be quite efficient in uniformly heating a home.
FIGURE14.18Convection plays an important role in heat transfer inside this pot of water. Once conducted to the inside, heat transfer to
other parts of the pot is mostly by convection. The hotter water expands, decreases in density, and rises to transfer heat to other regions of
the water, while colder water sinks to the bottom. This process keeps repeating.
PAGE: 618
600 14 • Heat and Heat Transfer Methods
Take-Home Experiment: Convection Rolls in a Heated Pan
Take two small pots of water and use an eye dropper to place a drop of food coloring near the bottom of each.
Leave one on a bench top and heat the other over a stovetop. Watch how the color spreads and how long it takes
the color to reach the top. Watch how convective loops form.
EXAMPLE 14.7
Calculating Heat Transfer by Convection: Convection of Air Through the Walls of a House
Most houses are not airtight: air goes in and out around doors and windows, through cracks and crevices, following
wiring to switches and outlets, and so on. The air in a typical house is completely replaced in less than an hour.
Suppose that a moderately-sized house has inside dimensions high, and that all air is
replaced in 30.0 min. Calculate the heat transfer per unit time in watts needed to warm the incoming cold air by
, thus replacing the heat transferred by convection alone.
Strategy
Heat is used to raise the temperature of air so that . The rate of heat transfer is then , where is the
time for air turnover. We are given that is , but we must still find values for the mass of air and its specific
heat before we can calculate . The specific heat of air is a weighted average of the specific heats of nitrogen and
oxygen, which gives fromTable 14.1(note that the specific heat at constant pressure must
be used for this process).
Solution
1. Determine the mass of air from its density and the given volume of the house. The density is given from the
density and the volume
14.37
2. Calculate the heat transferred from the change in air temperature: so that
14.38
3. Calculate the heat transfer from the heat and the turnover time . Since air is turned over in
, the heat transferred per unit time is
14.39
Discussion
This rate of heat transfer is equal to the power consumed by about forty-six 100-W light bulbs. Newly constructed
homes are designed for a turnover time of 2 hours or more, rather than 30 minutes for the house of this example.
Weather stripping, caulking, and improved window seals are commonly employed. More extreme measures are
sometimes taken in very cold (or hot) climates to achieve a tight standard of more than 6 hours for one air turnover.
Still longer turnover times are unhealthy, because a minimum amount of fresh air is necessary to supply oxygen for
breathing and to dilute household pollutants. The term used for the process by which outside air leaks into the
house from cracks around windows, doors, and the foundation is called “air infiltration.”
A cold wind is much more chilling than still cold air, because convection combines with conduction in the body to
increase the rate at which energy is transferred away from the body. The table below gives approximate wind-chill
factors, which are the temperatures of still air that produce the same rate of cooling as air of a given temperature
and speed. Wind-chill factors are a dramatic reminder of convection’s ability to transfer heat faster than conduction.
For example, a 15.0 m/s wind at has the chilling equivalent of still air at about .
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 619
14.6 • Convection 601
Moving air temperature Wind speed (m/s)
TABLE14.4Wind-Chill Factors
Although air can transfer heat rapidly by convection, it is a poor conductor and thus a good insulator. The amount of
available space for airflow determines whether air acts as an insulator or conductor. The space between the inside
and outside walls of a house, for example, is about 9 cm (3.5 in) —large enough for convection to work effectively.
The addition of wall insulation prevents airflow, so heat loss (or gain) is decreased. Similarly, the gap between the
two panes of a double-paned window is about 1 cm, which prevents convection and takes advantage of air’s low
conductivity to prevent greater loss. Fur, fiber, and fiberglass also take advantage of the low conductivity of air by
trapping it in spaces too small to support convection, as shown in the figure. Fur and feathers are lightweight and
thus ideal for the protection of animals.
FIGURE14.19Fur is filled with air, breaking it up into many small pockets. Convection is very slow here, because the loops are so small.
The low conductivity of air makes fur a very good lightweight insulator.
Some interesting phenomena happenwhen convection is accompanied by a phase change. It allows us to cool off
by sweating, even if the temperature of the surrounding air exceeds body temperature. Heat from the skin is
required for sweat to evaporate from the skin, but without air flow, the air becomes saturated and evaporation
stops. Air flow caused by convection replaces the saturated air by dry air and evaporation continues.
PAGE: 620
602 14 • Heat and Heat Transfer Methods
EXAMPLE 14.8
Calculate the Flow of Mass during Convection: Sweat-Heat Transfer away from the Body
The average person produces heat at the rate of about 120 W when at rest. At what rate must water evaporate from
the body to get rid of all this energy? (This evaporation might occur when a person is sitting in the shade and
surrounding temperatures are the same as skin temperature, eliminating heat transfer by other methods.)
Strategy
Energy is needed for a phase change ( ). Thus, the energy loss per unit time is
14.40
We divide both sides of the equation by to find that the mass evaporated per unit time is
14.41
Solution
(1) Insert the value of the latent heat fromTable 14.2, . This yields
14.42
Discussion
Evaporating about 3 g/min seems reasonable. This would be about 180 g (about 7 oz) per hour. If the air is very dry,
the sweat may evaporate without even being noticed. A significant amount of evaporation also takes place in the
lungs and breathing passages.
Another important example of the combination of phase change and convection occurs when water evaporates from
the oceans. Heat is removed from the ocean when water evaporates. If the water vapor condenses in liquid droplets
as clouds form, heat is released in the atmosphere. Thus, there is an overall transfer of heat from the ocean to the
atmosphere. This process is the driving power behind thunderheads, those great cumulus clouds that rise as much
as 20.0 km into the stratosphere. Water vapor carried in by convection condenses, releasing tremendous amounts
of energy. This energy causes the air to expand and rise, where it is colder. More condensation occurs in these colder
regions, which in turn drives the cloud even higher. Such a mechanism is called positive feedback, since the process
reinforces and accelerates itself. These systems sometimes produce violent storms, with lightning and hail, and
constitute the mechanism driving hurricanes.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 621
14.6 • Convection 603
FIGURE14.20Cumulus clouds are caused by water vapor that rises because of convection. The rise of clouds is driven by a positive
feedback mechanism. (credit: Mike Love)
FIGURE14.21Convection accompanied by a phase change releases the energy needed to drive this thunderhead into the stratosphere.
(credit: Gerardo García Moretti )
FIGURE14.22The phase change that occurs when this iceberg melts involves tremendous heat transfer. (credit: Dominic Alves)
The movement of icebergs is another example of convection accompanied by a phase change. Suppose an iceberg
drifts from Greenland into warmer Atlantic waters. Heat is removed from the warm ocean water when the ice melts
and heat is released to the land mass when the iceberg forms on Greenland.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Explain why using a fan in the summer feels refreshing!
PAGE: 622
604 14 • Heat and Heat Transfer Methods
Solution
Using a fan increases the flow of air: warm air near your body is replaced by cooler air from elsewhere. Convection
increases the rate of heat transfer so that moving air “feels” cooler than still air.
14.7 Radiation
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Discuss heat transfer by radiation.
• Explain the power of different materials.
You can feel the heat transfer from a fire and from the Sun. Similarly, you can sometimes tell that the oven is hot
without touching its door or looking inside—it may just warm you as you walk by. The space between the Earth and
the Sun is largely empty, without any possibility of heat transfer by convection or conduction. In these examples,
heat is transferred by radiation. That is, the hot body emits electromagnetic waves that are absorbed by our skin: no
medium is required for electromagnetic waves to propagate. Different names are used for electromagnetic waves of
different wavelengths: radio waves, microwaves, infraredradiation, visible light, ultraviolet radiation, X-rays, and
gamma rays.
FIGURE14.23Most of the heat transfer from this fire to the observers is through infrared radiation. The visible light, although dramatic,
transfers relatively little thermal energy. Convection transfers energy away from the observers as hot air rises, while conduction is negligibly
slow here. Skin is very sensitive to infrared radiation, so that you can sense the presence of a fire without looking at it directly. (credit:
Daniel X. O’Neil)
The energy of electromagnetic radiation depends on the wavelength (color) and varies over a wide range: a smaller
wavelength (or higher frequency) corresponds to a higher energy. Because more heat is radiated at higher
temperatures, a temperature change is accompanied by a color change. Take, for example, an electrical element on
a stove, which glows from red to orange, while the higher-temperature steel in a blast furnace glows from yellow to
white. The radiation you feel is mostly infrared, which corresponds to a lower temperature than that of the electrical
element and the steel. The radiated energy depends on its intensity, which is represented in the figure below by the
height of the distribution.
Electromagnetic Wavesexplains more about the electromagnetic spectrum andIntroduction to Quantum Physics
discusses how the decrease in wavelength corresponds to an increase in energy.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 623
14.7 • Radiation 605
FIGURE14.24(a) A graph of the spectra of electromagnetic waves emitted from an ideal radiator at three different temperatures. The
intensity or rate of radiation emission increases dramatically with temperature, and the spectrum shifts toward the visible and ultraviolet
parts of the spectrum. The shaded portion denotes the visible part of the spectrum. It is apparent that the shift toward the ultraviolet with
temperature makes the visible appearance shift from red to white to blue as temperature increases. (b) Note the variations in color
corresponding to variations in flame temperature. (credit: Tuohirulla)
All objects absorb and emit electromagnetic radiation. The rate of heat transfer by radiation is largely determined by
the color of the object. Black is the most effective, and white is the least effective. People living in hot climates
generally avoid wearing black clothing, for instance. Similarly, black asphalt in a parking lot will be hotter than
adjacent gray sidewalk on a summer day, because black absorbs better than gray. The reverse is also true—black
radiates better than gray. Thus, on a clear summer night, the asphalt will be colder than the gray sidewalk, because
black radiates the energy more rapidly than gray. Anideal radiatoris the same color as anideal absorber, and
captures all the radiation that falls on it. In contrast, white is a poor absorber and is also a poor radiator. A white
object reflects all radiation, like a mirror. (A perfect, polished white surface is mirror-like in appearance, and a
crushed mirror looks white.)
FIGURE14.25This illustration shows that the darker pavement is hotter than the lighter pavement (much more of the ice on the right has
melted), although both have been in the sunlight for the same time. The thermal conductivities of the pavements are the same.
Gray objects have a uniform ability to absorb all parts of the electromagnetic spectrum. Colored objects behave in
similar but more complex ways, which gives them a particular color in the visible range and may make them special
in other ranges of the nonvisible spectrum. Take, for example, the strong absorption of infrared radiation by the skin,
which allows us to be very sensitive to it.
PAGE: 624
606 14 • Heat and Heat Transfer Methods
FIGURE14.26A black object is a good absorber and a good radiator, while a white (or silver) object is a poor absorber and a poor radiator.
It is as if radiation from the inside is reflected back into the silver object, whereas radiation from the inside of the black object is “absorbed”
when it hits the surface and finds itself on the outside and is strongly emitted.
The rate of heat transfer by emitted radiation is determined by theStefan-Boltzmann law of radiation:
14.43
where is the Stefan-Boltzmann constant, is the surface area of the object, and is
its absolute temperature in kelvin. The symbol stands for theemissivityof the object, which is a measure of how
well it radiates. An ideal jet-black (or black body) radiator has , whereas a perfect reflector has . Real
objects fall between these two values. Take, for example, tungsten light bulb filaments which have an of about ,
and carbon black (a material used in printer toner), which has the (greatest known) emissivity of about .
The radiation rate is directly proportional to thefourth powerof the absolute temperature—a remarkably strong
temperature dependence. Furthermore, the radiated heat is proportional to the surface area of the object. If you
knock apart the coals of a fire, there is a noticeable increase in radiation due to an increase in radiating surface area.
FIGURE14.27A thermograph of part of a building shows temperature variations, indicating where heat transfer to the outside is most
severe. Windows are a major region of heat transfer to the outside of homes. (credit: U.S. Army)
Skin is a remarkably good absorber and emitter of infrared radiation, having an emissivity of 0.97 in the infrared
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 625
14.7 • Radiation 607
spectrum. Thus, we are all nearly (jet) black in the infrared, in spite of the obvious variations in skin color. This high
infrared emissivity is why we can so easily feel radiation on our skin. It is also the basis for the use of night scopes
used by law enforcement and the military to detect human beings. Even small temperature variations can be
detected because of the dependence. Images, calledthermographs, can be used medically to detect regions of
abnormally high temperature in the body, perhaps indicative of disease. Similar techniques can be used to detect
heat leaks in homesFigure 14.27, optimize performance of blast furnaces, improve comfort levels in work
environments, and even remotely map the Earth’s temperature profile.
All objects emit and absorb radiation. Thenetrate of heat transfer by radiation (absorption minus emission) is
related to both the temperature of the object and the temperature of its surroundings. Assuming that an object with
a temperature is surrounded by an environment with uniform temperature , thenet rate of heat transfer by
radiationis
14.44
where is the emissivity of the object alone. In other words, it does not matter whether the surroundings are white,
gray, or black; the balance of radiation into and out of the object depends on how well it emits and absorbs
radiation. When , the quantity is positive; that is, the net heat transfer is from hot to cold.
Take-Home Experiment: Temperature in the Sun
Place a thermometer out in the sunshine and shield it from direct sunlight using an aluminum foil. What is the
reading? Now remove the shield, and note what the thermometer reads. Take a handkerchief soaked in nail
polish remover, wrap it around the thermometer and place it in the sunshine. What does the thermometer read?
EXAMPLE 14.9
Calculate the Net Heat Transfer of a Person: Heat Transfer by Radiation
What is the rate of heat transfer by radiation, with an unclothed person standing in a dark room whose ambient
temperature is . The person has a normal skin temperature of and a surface area of . The
emissivity of skin is 0.97 in the infrared, where the radiation takes place.
Strategy
We can solve this by using the equation for the rate of radiative heat transfer.
Solution
Insert the temperatures values and , so that
14.45
14.46
14.47
Discussion
This value is a significant rate of heat transfer to the environment (note the minus sign), considering that a person at
rest may produce energy at the rate of 125 W and that conduction and convection will also be transferring energy to
the environment. Indeed, we would probably expect this person to feel cold. Clothing significantly reduces heat
transfer to the environment by many methods, because clothing slows down both conduction and convection, and
has a lower emissivity (especially if it is white) than skin.
The Earth receives almost all its energy from radiation of the Sun and reflects some of it back into outer space.
Because the Sun is hotter than the Earth, the net energy flux is from the Sun to the Earth. However, the rate of
PAGE: 626
608 14 • Heat and Heat Transfer Methods
energy transfer is less than the equation for the radiative heat transfer would predict because the Sun does not fill
the sky. The average emissivity ( ) of the Earth is about 0.65, but the calculation of this value is complicated by the
fact that the highly reflective cloud coverage varies greatly from day to day. There is a negative feedback (one in
which a change produces an effect that opposes that change) between clouds and heat transfer; greater
temperatures evaporate more water to form more clouds, which reflect more radiation back into space, reducing the
temperature. The often mentionedgreenhouse effectis directly related to the variation of the Earth’s emissivity
with radiation type (see the figure given below). The greenhouse effect is a natural phenomenon responsible for
providing temperatures suitable for life on Earth. The Earth’s relatively constant temperature is a result of the
energy balance between the incoming solar radiation and the energy radiated from the Earth. Most of the infrared
radiation emitted from the Earth is absorbed by carbon dioxide ( ) and water ( ) in the atmosphere and then
re-radiated back to the Earth or into outer space. Re-radiation back to the Earth maintains its surface temperature
about higher than it would be if there was no atmosphere, similar to the way glass increases temperatures in a
greenhouse.
The greenhouse effect and its causes were first predicted by Eunice Newton Foote after she designed and
conducted experiments on heating of different gases. After filling flasks with carbon dioxide, hydrogen, and regular
air, then also modifying moisture, she placed them in the sun and carefully measured their heating and, especially,
their heat retention. She discovered that the CO flask gained the most temperature and held it the longest. After
2
subsequent research, her paper "Circumstances affecting the Heat of the Sun’s Rays" included conclusions that an
atmosphere consisting of more carbon dioxide would be hotter resulting from the gas trapping radiation.
FIGURE14.28The greenhouse effect is a name given to the trapping of energy in the Earth’s atmosphere by a process similar to that used
in greenhouses. The atmosphere, like window glass, is transparent to incoming visible radiation and most of the Sun’s infrared. These
wavelengths are absorbed by the Earth and re-emitted as infrared. Since Earth’s temperature is much lower than that of the Sun, the
infrared radiated by the Earth has a much longer wavelength. The atmosphere, like glass, traps these longer infrared rays, keeping the Earth
warmer than it would otherwise be. The amount of trapping depends on concentrations of trace gases like carbon dioxide, and a change in
the concentration of these gases is believed to affect the Earth’s surface temperature.
The greenhouse effect is also central to the discussion of global warming due to emission of carbon dioxide and
methane (and other so-called greenhouse gases) into the Earth’s atmosphere from industrial production and
farming. Changes in global climate could lead to more intense storms, precipitation changes (affecting agriculture),
reduction in rain forest biodiversity, and rising sea levels.
Heating and cooling are often significant contributors to energy use in individual homes. Mária Telkes, a Hungarian-
born American scientist, was among the foremost developers of solar energy applications in industrial and
community use. After inventing a widely deployed solar seawater distiller used on World War II life rafts, she
partnered with architect Eleanor Raymond to design the first modern home to be completely heated by solar power.
Air warmed on rooftop collectors transferred heat to salts, which stored the heat for later use. Telkes later worked
with the Department of Energy to develop the first solar-electrically powered home. Current research efforts into
developing environmentally friendly homes quite often focus on reducing conventional heating and cooling through
better building materials, strategically positioning windows to optimize radiation gain from the Sun, and opening
spaces to allow convection. It is possible to build a zero-energy house that allows for comfortable living in most
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 627
14.7 • Radiation 609
parts of the United States with hot and humid summers and cold winters.
FIGURE14.29This simple but effective solar cooker uses the greenhouse effect and reflective material to trap and retain solar energy.
Made of inexpensive, durable materials, it saves money and labor, and is of particular economic value in countries with lower energy
availability. Mária Telkes, a pioneering innovator in solar applications, developed some of the earliest models of these cookers in the 1950s.
(credit: E.B. Kauai)
Conversely, dark space is very cold, about , so that the Earth radiates energy into the dark sky. Owing
to the fact that clouds have lower emissivity than either oceans or land masses, they reflect some of the radiation
back to the surface, greatly reducing heat transfer into dark space, just as they greatly reduce heat transfer into the
atmosphere during the day. The rate of heat transfer from soil and grasses can be so rapid that frost may occur on
clear summer evenings, even in warm latitudes.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
What is the change in the rate of the radiated heat by a body at the temperature compared to when the
body is at the temperature ?
Solution
The radiated heat is proportional to the fourth power of theabsolute temperature. Because and
, the rate of heat transfer increases by about 30 percent of the original rate.
Career Connection: Energy Conservation Consultation
The cost of energy is generally believed to remain very high for the foreseeable future. Thus, passive control of
heat loss in both commercial and domestic housing will become increasingly important. Energy consultants
measure and analyze the flow of energy into and out of houses and ensure that a healthy exchange of air is
maintained inside the house. The job prospects for an energy consultant are strong.
Problem-Solving Strategies for the Methods of Heat Transfer
1. Examine the situation to determine what type of heat transfer is involved.
2. Identify the type(s) of heat transfer—conduction, convection, or radiation.
3. Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem (identify the unknowns). A written list is very
useful.
4. Make a list of what is given or can be inferred from the problem as stated (identify the knowns).
5. Solve the appropriate equation for the quantity to be determined (the unknown).
6. For conduction, equation is appropriate.Table 14.3lists thermal conductivities. For
convection, determine the amount of matter moved and use equation , to calculate the heat
transfer involved in the temperature change of the fluid. If a phase change accompanies convection,
equation or is appropriate to find the heat transfer involved in the phase change.Table
14.2lists information relevant to phase change. For radiation, equation gives the
PAGE: 628
610 14 • Heat and Heat Transfer Methods
net heat transfer rate.
7. Insert the knowns along with their units into the appropriate equation and obtain numerical solutions
complete with units.
8. Check the answer to see if it is reasonable. Does it make sense?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 629
14 • Glossary 611
Glossary
conduction heat transfer through stationary matter Rfactor the ratio of thickness to the conductivity of a
by physical contact material
convection heat transfer by the macroscopic radiation energy transferred by electromagnetic
movement of fluid waves directly as a result of a temperature
emissivity measure of how well an object radiates difference
greenhouse effect warming of the Earth that is due radiation heat transfer which occurs when
to gases such as carbon dioxide and methane that microwaves, infrared radiation, visible light, or other
absorb infrared radiation from the Earth’s surface electromagnetic radiation is emitted or absorbed
and reradiate it in all directions, thus sending a rate of conductive heat transfer rate of heat transfer
fraction of it back toward the surface of the Earth from one material to another
heat the spontaneous transfer of energy due to a specific heat the amount of heat necessary to change
temperature difference the temperature of 1.00 kg of a substance by 1.00
heat of sublimation the energy required to change a ºC
substance from the solid phase to the vapor phase Stefan-Boltzmann law of radiation
kilocalorie where is the Stefan-Boltzmann constant, is the
latent heat coefficient a physical constant equal to surface area of the object, is the absolute
the amount of heat transferred for every 1 kg of a temperature, and is the emissivity
substance during the change in phase of the sublimation the transition from the solid phase to the
substance vapor phase
mechanical equivalent of heat the work needed to thermal conductivity the property of a material’s
produce the same effects as heat transfer ability to conduct heat
net rate of heat transfer by radiation is
Section Summary
14.1Heat • Phase changes occur at fixed temperatures for a
given substance at a given pressure, and these
• Heat and work are the two distinct methods of
temperatures are called boiling and freezing (or
energy transfer.
melting) points.
• Heat is energy transferred solely due to a
• During phase changes, heat absorbed or released
temperature difference.
is given by:
• Any energy unit can be used for heat transfer, and
the most common are kilocalorie (kcal) and joule
where is the latent heat coefficient.
(J).
• Kilocalorie is defined to be the energy needed to 14.4Heat Transfer Methods
change the temperature of 1.00 kg of water
• Heat is transferred by three different methods:
between and .
conduction, convection, and radiation.
• The mechanical equivalent of this heat transfer is
14.5Conduction
14.2Temperature Change and Heat • Heat conduction is the transfer of heat between
Capacity two objects in direct contact with each other.
• The rate of heat transfer (energy per unit time)
• The transfer of heat that leads to a change
is proportional to the temperature difference
in the temperature of a body with mass is
and the contact area and inversely
, where is the specific heat of the
proportional to the distance between the
material. This relationship can also be considered
objects:
as the definition of specific heat.
14.3Phase Change and Latent Heat
14.6Convection
• Most substances can exist either in solid, liquid,
and gas forms, which are referred to as “phases.” • Convection is heat transfer by the macroscopic
PAGE: 630
612 14 • Conceptual Questions
movement of mass. Convection can be natural or
forced and generally transfers thermal energy
faster than conduction.Table 14.4gives wind-chill where is the
factors, indicating that moving air has the same Stefan-Boltzmann constant and is the emissivity
chilling effect of much colder stationary air. of the body. For a black body, whereas a
Convection that occurs along with a phase change shiny white or perfect reflector has , with real
can transfer energy from cold regions to warm objects having values of between 1 and 0. The
ones. net rate of heat transfer by radiation is
14.7Radiation
• Radiation is the rate of heat transfer through the where is the temperature of an object
emission or absorption of electromagnetic waves. surrounded by an environment with uniform
• The rate of heat transfer depends on the surface temperature and is the emissivity of the
area and the fourth power of the absolute object.
temperature:
Conceptual Questions
14.1Heat 11. In very humid climates where there are numerous
bodies of water, such as in Florida, it is unusual for
1. How is heat transfer related to temperature?
temperatures to rise above about . In
2. Describe a situation in which heat transfer occurs.
deserts, however, temperatures can rise far above
What are the resulting forms of energy?
this. Explain how the evaporation of water helps
3. When heat transfers into a system, is the energy
limit high temperatures in humid climates.
stored as heat? Explain briefly.
12. In winters, it is often warmer in San Francisco than
in nearby Sacramento, 150 km inland. In
14.2Temperature Change and Heat
summers, it is nearly always hotter in Sacramento.
Capacity
Explain how the bodies of water surrounding San
4. What three factors affect the heat transfer that is Francisco moderate its extreme temperatures.
necessary to change an object’s temperature? 13. Putting a lid on a boiling pot greatly reduces the
5. The brakes in a car increase in temperature by heat transfer necessary to keep it boiling. Explain
when bringing the car to rest from a speed . How why.
much greater would be if the car initially had 14. Freeze-dried foods have been dehydrated in a
twice the speed? You may assume the car to stop vacuum. During the process, the food freezes and
sufficiently fast so that no heat transfers out of the must be heated to facilitate dehydration. Explain
brakes. both how the vacuum speeds up dehydration and
why the food freezes as a result.
14.3Phase Change and Latent Heat 15. When still air cools by radiating at night, it is
unusual for temperatures to fall below the dew
6. Heat transfer can cause temperature and phase point. Explain why.
changes. What else can cause these changes? 16. In a physics classroom demonstration, an
7. How does the latent heat of fusion of water help instructor inflates a balloon by mouth and then
slow the decrease of air temperatures, perhaps cools it in liquid nitrogen. When cold, the shrunken
preventing temperatures from falling significantly balloon has a small amount of light blue liquid in
below , in the vicinity of large bodies of water? it, as well as some snow-like crystals. As it warms
8. What is the temperature of ice right after it is up, the liquid boils, and part of the crystals
formed by freezing water? sublimate, with some crystals lingering for awhile
9. If you place ice into water in an insulated and then producing a liquid. Identify the blue
container, what will happen? Will some ice melt, liquid and the two solids in the cold balloon.
will more water freeze, or will neither take place? Justify your identifications using data fromTable
10. What effect does condensation on a glass of ice 14.2.
water have on the rate at which the ice melts? Will
the condensation speed up the melting process or
slow it down?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 631
14 • Conceptual Questions 613
14.4Heat Transfer Methods 21. Loose-fitting white clothing covering most of the
body is ideal for desert dwellers, both in the hot
17. What are the main methods of heat transfer from
Sun and during cold evenings. Explain how such
the hot core of Earth to its surface? From Earth’s
clothing is advantageous during both day and
surface to outer space?
night.
18. When our bodies get too warm, they respond by
sweating and increasing blood circulation to the
surface to transfer thermal energy away from the
core. What effect will this have on a person in a
hot tub?
19. Figure 14.30shows a cut-away drawing of a
thermos bottle (also known as a Dewar flask),
which is a device designed specifically to slow
down all forms of heat transfer. Explain the
functions of the various parts, such as the
vacuum, the silvering of the walls, the thin-walled
long glass neck, the rubber support, the air layer,
and the stopper.
FIGURE14.31A jellabiya is worn by many men in Egypt.
(credit: Zerida)
14.6Convection
22. One way to make a fireplace more energy efficient
FIGURE14.30The construction of a thermos bottle is designed to is to have an external air supply for the
inhibit all methods of heat transfer. combustion of its fuel. Another is to have room air
circulate around the outside of the fire box and
14.5Conduction
back into the room. Detail the methods of heat
20. Some electric stoves have a flat ceramic surface transfer involved in each.
with heating elements hidden beneath. A pot 23. On cold, clear nights horses will sleep under the
placed over a heating element will be heated, cover of large trees. How does this help them keep
while it is safe to touch the surface only a few warm?
centimeters away. Why is ceramic, with a
14.7Radiation
conductivity less than that of a metal but greater
than that of a good insulator, an ideal choice for
24. When watching a daytime circus in a large, dark-
the stove top?
colored tent, you sense significant heat transfer
from the tent. Explain why this occurs.
25. Satellites designed to observe the radiation from
cold (3 K) dark space have sensors that are
shaded from the Sun, Earth, and Moon and that
are cooled to very low temperatures. Why must
the sensors be at low temperature?
26. Why are cloudy nights generally warmer than clear
ones?
PAGE: 632
614 14 • Problems & Exercises
27. Why are thermometers that are used in weather 28. On average, would Earth be warmer or cooler
stations shielded from the sunshine? What does a without the atmosphere? Explain your answer.
thermometer measure if it is shielded from the
sunshine and also if it is not?
Problems & Exercises
14.2Temperature Change and Heat 9. Following vigorous exercise, the body temperature
Capacity of an 80.0-kg person is . At what rate in
watts must the person transfer thermal energy to
1. On a hot day, the temperature of an 80,000-L
reduce the the body temperature to in 30.0
swimming pool increases by . What is the
min, assuming the body continues to produce
net heat transfer during this heating? Ignore any
energy at the rate of 150 W?
complications, such as loss of water by evaporation.
.
2. Show that .
10. Even when shut down after a period of normal use,
3. To sterilize a 50.0-g glass baby bottle, we must
a large commercial nuclear reactor transfers
raise its temperature from to . How
thermal energy at the rate of 150 MW by the
much heat transfer is required?
radioactive decay of fission products. This heat
4. The same heat transfer into identical masses of
transfer causes a rapid increase in temperature if
different substances produces different
the cooling system fails (1 watt = 1 joule/second
temperature changes. Calculate the final
or 1 W = 1 J/s and 1 MW = 1 megawatt). (a)
temperature when 1.00 kcal of heat transfers into
Calculate the rate of temperature increase in
1.00 kg of the following, originally at : (a)
degrees Celsius per second if the mass of
water; (b) concrete; (c) steel; and (d) mercury.
the reactor core is and it has an
5. Rubbing your hands together warms them by
average specific heat of . (b)
converting work into thermal energy. If a woman
How long would it take to obtain a temperature
rubs her hands back and forth for a total of 20 rubs,
increase of , which could cause some
at a distance of 7.50 cm per rub, and with an
metals holding the radioactive materials to melt?
average frictional force of 40.0 N, what is the
(The initial rate of temperature increase would be
temperature increase? The mass of tissues warmed
greater than that calculated here because the heat
is only 0.100 kg, mostly in the palms and fingers.
transfer is concentrated in a smaller mass. Later,
6. A 0.250-kg block of a pure material is heated from
however, the temperature increase would slow
to by the addition of 4.35 kJ of
down because the steel containment
energy. Calculate its specific heat and identify the
vessel would also begin to heat up.)
substance of which it is most likely composed.
7. Suppose identical amounts of heat transfer into
different masses of copper and water, causing
identical changes in temperature. What is the ratio
of the mass of copper to water?
8. (a) The number of kilocalories in food is determined
by calorimetry techniques in which the food is
burned and the amount of heat transfer is
measured. How many kilocalories per gram are
there in a 5.00-g peanut if the energy from burning
it is transferred to 0.500 kg of water held in a
0.100-kg aluminum cup, causing a
temperature increase? (b) Compare your answer to
labeling information found on a package of peanuts
and comment on whether the values are consistent.
FIGURE14.32Radioactive spent-fuel pool at a nuclear power
plant. Spent fuel stays hot for a long time. (credit: U.S. Department
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 633
14 • Problems & Exercises 615
of Energy) 18. In 1986, a gargantuan iceberg broke away from
the Ross Ice Shelf in Antarctica. It was
14.3Phase Change and Latent Heat
approximately a rectangle 160 km long, 40.0 km
wide, and 250 m thick.
11. How much heat transfer (in kilocalories) is
(a) What is the mass of this iceberg, given that the
required to thaw a 0.450-kg package of frozen
density of ice is ?
vegetables originally at if their heat of fusion
(b) How much heat transfer (in joules) is needed to
is the same as that of water?
melt it?
12. A bag containing ice is much more effective in
(c) How many years would it take sunlight alone to
absorbing energy than one containing the same
melt ice this thick, if the ice absorbs an average of
amount of water.
a. How much heat transfer is necessary to raise , 12.00 h per day?
the temperature of 0.800 kg of water from 19. How many grams of coffee must evaporate from
to 350 g of coffee in a 100-g glass cup to cool the
b. How much heat transfer is required to first coffee from to ? You may assume
melt 0.800 kg of ice and then raise its the coffee has the same thermal properties as
temperature? water and that the average heat of vaporization is
c. Explain how your answer supports the 2340 kJ/kg (560 cal/g). (You may neglect the
contention that the ice is more effective. change in mass of the coffee as it cools, which will
give you an answer that is slightly larger than
13. (a) How much heat transfer is required to raise the
correct.)
temperature of a 0.750-kg aluminum pot
20. (a) It is difficult to extinguish a fire on a crude oil
containing 2.50 kg of water from to the
tanker, because each liter of crude oil releases
boiling point and then boil away 0.750 kg of
of energy when burned. To illustrate
water? (b) How long does this take if the rate of
this difficulty, calculate the number of liters of
heat transfer is 500 W
water that must be expended to absorb the energy
?
released by burning 1.00 L of crude oil, if the
14. The formation of condensation on a glass of ice
water has its temperature raised from to
water causes the ice to melt faster than it would
, it boils, and the resulting steam is raised to
otherwise. If 8.00 g of condensation forms on a
. (b) Discuss additional complications
glass containing both water and 200 g of ice, how
caused by the fact that crude oil has a smaller
many grams of the ice will melt as a result?
density than water.
Assume no other heat transfer occurs.
21. The energy released from condensation in
15. On a trip, you notice that a 3.50-kg bag of ice lasts
thunderstorms can be very large. Calculate the
an average of one day in your cooler. What is the
energy released into the atmosphere for a small
average power in watts entering the ice if it starts
storm of radius 1 km, assuming that 1.0 cm of rain
at and completely melts to water in
is precipitated uniformly over this area.
exactly one day
22. To help prevent frost damage, 4.00 kg of
?
water is sprayed onto a fruit tree.
16. On a certain dry sunny day, a swimming pool’s
(a) How much heat transfer occurs as the water
temperature would rise by if not for
freezes?
evaporation. What fraction of the water must
(b) How much would the temperature of the
evaporate to carry away precisely enough energy
200-kg tree decrease if this amount of heat
to keep the temperature constant?
transferred from the tree? Take the specific heat
17. (a) How much heat transfer is necessary to raise
to be , and assume that no phase
the temperature of a 0.200-kg piece of ice from
change occurs.
to , including the energy needed
23. A 0.250-kg aluminum bowl holding 0.800 kg of
for phase changes?
soup at is placed in a freezer. What is the
(b) How much time is required for each stage,
final temperature if 377 kJ of energy is transferred
assuming a constant 20.0 kJ/s rate of heat
from the bowl and soup, assuming the soup’s
transfer?
thermal properties are the same as that of water?
(c) Make a graph of temperature versus time for
Explicitly show how you follow the steps in
this process.
Problem-Solving Strategies for the Effects of Heat
Transfer.
PAGE: 634
616 14 • Problems & Exercises
24. A 0.0500-kg ice cube at is placed in 14.5Conduction
0.400 kg of water in a very well-insulated
30. (a) Calculate the rate of heat conduction through
container. What is the final temperature?
house walls that are 13.0 cm thick and that have
25. If you pour 0.0100 kg of water onto a
an average thermal conductivity twice that of
1.20-kg block of ice (which is initially at ),
glass wool. Assume there are no windows or
what is the final temperature? You may assume
doors. The surface area of the walls is and
that the water cools so rapidly that effects of the
their inside surface is at , while their
surroundings are negligible.
outside surface is at . (b) How many 1-kW
26. Indigenous people sometimes cook in watertight
room heaters would be needed to balance the
baskets by placing hot rocks into water to bring it
heat transfer due to conduction?
to a boil. What mass of rock must be placed
31. The rate of heat conduction out of a window on a
in 4.00 kg of water to bring its temperature
winter day is rapid enough to chill the air next to it.
to , if 0.0250 kg of water escapes as vapor
To see just how rapidly the windows transfer heat
from the initial sizzle? You may neglect the effects
by conduction, calculate the rate of conduction in
of the surroundings and take the average specific
watts through a window that is
heat of the rocks to be that of granite.
thick (1/4 in) if the temperatures of the inner and
27. What would be the final temperature of the pan
outer surfaces are and ,
and water inCalculating the Final Temperature
respectively. This rapid rate will not be
When Heat Is Transferred Between Two Bodies:
maintained—the inner surface will cool, and even
Pouring Cold Water in a Hot Panif 0.260 kg of
result in frost formation.
water was placed in the pan and 0.0100 kg of the
32. Calculate the rate of heat conduction out of the
water evaporated immediately, leaving the
human body, assuming that the core internal
remainder to come to a common temperature with
temperature is , the skin temperature is
the pan?
, the thickness of the tissues between
28. In some countries, liquid nitrogen is used on dairy
averages , and the surface area is
trucks instead of mechanical refrigerators. A
.
3.00-hour delivery trip requires 200 L of liquid
33. Suppose you stand with one foot on ceramic
nitrogen, which has a density of .
flooring and one foot on a wool carpet, making
(a) Calculate the heat transfer necessary to
contact over an area of with each foot.
evaporate this amount of liquid nitrogen and raise
Both the ceramic and the carpet are 2.00 cm thick
its temperature to . (Use and assume it
and are on their bottom sides. At what rate
is constant over the temperature range.) This
must heat transfer occur from each foot to keep
value is the amount of cooling the liquid nitrogen
the top of the ceramic and carpet at ? For
supplies.
ceramic, use the thermal conductivity for glass.
(b) What is this heat transfer rate in kilowatt-
34. A man consumes 3000 kcal of food in one day,
hours?
converting most of it to maintain body
(c) Compare the amount of cooling obtained from
temperature. If he loses half this energy by
melting an identical mass of ice with that from
evaporating water (through breathing and
evaporating the liquid nitrogen.
sweating), how many kilograms of water
29. Some gun fanciers make their own bullets, which
evaporate?
involves melting and casting the lead slugs. How
much heat transfer is needed to raise the
temperature and melt 0.500 kg of lead, starting
from ?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 635
14 • Problems & Exercises 617
35. (a) A firewalker runs across a bed of hot coals 39. Suppose a person is covered head to foot by wool
without sustaining burns. Calculate the heat clothing with average thickness of 2.00 cm and is
transferred by conduction into the sole of one foot transferring energy by conduction through the
of a firewalker given that the bottom of the foot is clothing at the rate of 50.0 W. What is the
a 3.00-mm-thick callus with a conductivity at the temperature difference across the clothing, given
low end of the range for wood and its density is the surface area is ?
. The area of contact is , the 40. Some stove tops are smooth ceramic for easy
temperature of the coals is , and the time in cleaning. If the ceramic is 0.600 cm thick and heat
contact is 1.00 s. conduction occurs through the same area and at
(b) What temperature increase is produced in the the same rate as computed inExample 14.6, what
of tissue affected? is the temperature difference across it? Ceramic
(c) What effect do you think this will have on the has the same thermal conductivity as glass and
tissue, keeping in mind that a callus is made of brick.
dead cells? 41. One easy way to reduce heating (and cooling)
36. (a) What is the rate of heat conduction through the costs is to add extra insulation in the attic of a
3.00-cm-thick fur of a large animal having a house. Suppose the house already had 15 cm of
surface area? Assume that the animal’s fiberglass insulation in the attic and in all the
skin temperature is , that the air exterior surfaces. If you added an extra 8.0 cm of
temperature is , and that fur has the fiberglass to the attic, then by what percentage
same thermal conductivity as air. (b) What food would the heating cost of the house drop? Take
intake will the animal need in one day to replace the single story house to be of dimensions 10 m
this heat transfer? by 15 m by 3.0 m. Ignore air infiltration and heat
37. A walrus transfers energy by conduction through loss through windows and doors.
its blubber at the rate of 150 W when immersed in 42. (a) Calculate the rate of heat conduction through a
water. The walrus’s internal core double-paned window that has a area
temperature is , and it has a surface area of and is made of two panes of 0.800-cm-thick glass
. What is the average thickness of its separated by a 1.00-cm air gap. The inside surface
blubber, which has the conductivity of fatty tissues temperature is , while that on the outside is
without blood? . (Hint: There are identical temperature
drops across the two glass panes. First find these
and then the temperature drop across the air gap.
This problem ignores the increased heat transfer
in the air gap due to convection.)
(b) Calculate the rate of heat conduction through a
1.60-cm-thick window of the same area and with
the same temperatures. Compare your answer
with that for part (a).
43. Many decisions are made on the basis of the
payback period: the time it will take through
savings to equal the capital cost of an investment.
FIGURE14.33Walrus on ice. (credit: Captain Budd
Acceptable payback times depend upon the
Christman, NOAA Corps)
business or philosophy one has. (For some
38. Compare the rate of heat conduction through a
industries, a payback period is as small as two
13.0-cm-thick wall that has an area of years.) Suppose you wish to install the extra
and a thermal conductivity twice that of glass wool insulation inExercise 9.41. If energy cost $1.00
with the rate of heat conduction through a window per million joules and the insulation was $4.00 per
that is 0.750 cm thick and that has an area of square meter, then calculate the simple payback
, assuming the same temperature time. Take the average for the 120 day heating
difference across each. season to be .
PAGE: 636
618 14 • Problems & Exercises
44. For the human body, what is the rate of heat 51. The Kilauea volcano in Hawaii is the world’s most
transfer by conduction through the body’s tissue active, disgorging about of
with the following conditions: the tissue thickness lava per day. What is the rate of heat transfer out
is 3.00 cm, the change in temperature is , of Earth by convection if this lava has a density of
and the skin area is . How does this and eventually cools to ?
compare with the average heat transfer rate to the Assume that the specific heat of lava is the same
body resulting from an energy intake of about as that of granite.
2400 kcal per day? (No exercise is included.)
14.6Convection
45. At what wind speed does air cause the
same chill factor as still air at ?
46. At what temperature does still air cause the same
chill factor as air moving at 15 m/s?
47. The “steam” above a freshly made cup of instant
coffee is really water vapor droplets condensing
after evaporating from the hot coffee. What is the
final temperature of 250 g of hot coffee initially at
FIGURE14.34Lava flow on Kilauea volcano in Hawaii.
if 2.00 g evaporates from it? The coffee is
(credit: J. P. Eaton, U.S. Geological Survey)
in a Styrofoam cup, so other methods of heat
52. During heavy exercise, the body pumps 2.00 L of
transfer can be neglected.
blood per minute to the surface, where it is cooled
48. (a) How many kilograms of water must evaporate
by . What is the rate of heat transfer from
from a 60.0-kg woman to lower her body
this forced convection alone, assuming blood has
temperature by ?
the same specific heat as water and its density is
(b) Is this a reasonable amount of water to
?
evaporate in the form of perspiration, assuming
53. A person inhales and exhales 2.00 L of air,
the relative humidity of the surrounding air is low?
evaporating of water from the
49. On a hot dry day, evaporation from a lake has just
lungs and breathing passages with each breath.
enough heat transfer to balance the
(a) How much heat transfer occurs due to
of incoming heat from the Sun. What mass of
evaporation in each breath?
water evaporates in 1.00 h from each square
(b) What is the rate of heat transfer in watts if the
meter? Explicitly show how you follow the steps in
person is breathing at a moderate rate of 18.0
theProblem-Solving Strategies for the Effects of
breaths per minute?
Heat Transfer.
(c) If the inhaled air had a temperature of ,
50. One winter day, the climate control system of a
what is the rate of heat transfer for warming the
large university classroom building malfunctions.
air?
As a result, of excess cold air is brought in
(d) Discuss the total rate of heat transfer as it
each minute. At what rate in kilowatts must heat
relates to typical metabolic rates. Will this
transfer occur to warm this air by (that is,
breathing be a major form of heat transfer for this
to bring the air to room temperature)?
person?
54. A glass coffee pot has a circular bottom with a
9.00-cm diameter in contact with a heating
element that keeps the coffee warm with a
continuous heat transfer rate of 50.0 W
(a) What is the temperature of the bottom of the
pot, if it is 3.00 mm thick and the inside
temperature is ?
(b) If the temperature of the coffee remains
constant and all of the heat transfer is removed by
evaporation, how many grams per minute
evaporate? Take the heat of vaporization to be
2340 kJ/kg.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 637
14 • Problems & Exercises 619
14.7Radiation 61. Thermography is a technique for measuring
radiant heat and detecting variations in surface
55. At what net rate does heat radiate from a
temperatures that may be medically,
black roof on a night when the roof’s temperature
environmentally, or militarily meaningful.(a) What
is and the surrounding temperature is
is the percent increase in the rate of heat transfer
? The emissivity of the roof is 0.900.
by radiation from a given area at a temperature of
56. (a) Cherry-red embers in a fireplace are at
compared with that at , such as on
and have an exposed area of and an
a person’s skin? (b) What is the percent increase in
emissivity of 0.980. The surrounding room has a
the rate of heat transfer by radiation from a given
temperature of . If 50% of the radiant
area at a temperature of compared with
energy enters the room, what is the net rate of
that at , such as for warm and cool
radiant heat transfer in kilowatts? (b) Does your
automobile hoods?
answer support the contention that most of the
heat transfer into a room by a fireplace comes
from infrared radiation?
57. Radiation makes it impossible to stand close to a
hot lava flow. Calculate the rate of heat transfer by
radiation from of fresh lava into
surroundings, assuming lava’s emissivity is
1.00.
58. (a) Calculate the rate of heat transfer by radiation
from a car radiator at into a
environment, if the radiator has an emissivity of
0.750 and a surface area. (b) Is this a
significant fraction of the heat transfer by an
FIGURE14.35Artist’s rendition of a thermograph of a
automobile engine? To answer this, assume a patient’s upper body, showing the distribution of heat
horsepower of and the efficiency represented by different colors.
of automobile engines as 25%. 62. The Sun radiates like a perfect black body with an
59. Find the net rate of heat transfer by radiation from emissivity of exactly 1. (a) Calculate the surface
a skier standing in the shade, given the following. temperature of the Sun, given that it is a sphere
She is completely clothed in white (head to foot, with a radius that radiates
including a ski mask), the clothes have an
into 3-K space. (b) How much
emissivity of 0.200 and a surface temperature of
power does the Sun radiate per square meter of
, the surroundings are at , and her
its surface? (c) How much power in watts per
surface area is . square meter is that value at the distance of Earth,
60. Suppose you walk into a sauna that has an
away? (This number is called the
ambient temperature of . (a) Calculate the
solar constant.)
rate of heat transfer to you by radiation given your
63. A large body of lava from a volcano has stopped
skin temperature is , the emissivity of skin
flowing and is slowly cooling. The interior of the
is 0.98, and the surface area of your body is
lava is at , its surface is at , and the
. (b) If all other forms of heat transfer are surroundings are at . (a) Calculate the rate
balanced (the net heat transfer is zero), at what at which energy is transferred by radiation from
rate will your body temperature increase if your
of surface lava into the surroundings,
mass is 75.0 kg?
assuming the emissivity is 1.00. (b) Suppose heat
conduction to the surface occurs at the same rate.
What is the thickness of the lava between the
surface and the interior, assuming
that the lava’s conductivity is the same as that of
brick?
PAGE: 638
620 14 • Problems & Exercises
64. Calculate the temperature the entire sky would 68. Integrated Concepts
have to be in order to transfer energy by radiation Frozen waste from airplane toilets has sometimes
at —about the rate at which the Sun been accidentally ejected at high altitude.
radiates when it is directly overhead on a clear Ordinarily it breaks up and disperses over a large
day. This value is the effective temperature of the area, but sometimes it holds together and strikes
sky, a kind of average that takes account of the the ground. Calculate the mass of ice that can
fact that the Sun occupies only a small part of the be melted by the conversion of kinetic and
sky but is much hotter than the rest. Assume that gravitational potential energy when a
the body receiving the energy has a temperature piece of frozen waste is released at 12.0 km
of . altitude while moving at 250 m/s and strikes the
65. (a) A shirtless rider under a circus tent feels the ground at 100 m/s (since less than 20.0 kg melts,
heat radiating from the sunlit portion of the tent. a significant mess results).
Calculate the temperature of the tent canvas 69. Integrated Concepts
based on the following information: The shirtless (a) A large electrical power facility produces 1600
rider’s skin temperature is and has an MW of “waste heat,” which is dissipated to the
emissivity of 0.970. The exposed area of skin is environment in cooling towers by warming air
. He receives radiation at the rate of flowing through the towers by . What is the
20.0 W—half what you would calculate if the entire necessary flow rate of air in ? (b) Is your
region behind him was hot. The rest of the result consistent with the large cooling towers
surroundings are at . (b) Discuss how this used by many large electrical power plants?
situation would change if the sunlit side of the tent 70. Integrated Concepts
was nearly pure white and if the rider was covered (a) Suppose you start a workout on a Stairmaster,
by a white tunic. producing power at the same rate as climbing 116
66. Integrated Concepts stairs per minute. Assuming your mass is 76.0 kg
One day the relative humidity is , and your efficiency is , how long will it take
and that evening the temperature drops to , for your body temperature to rise if all
well below the dew point. (a) How many grams of other forms of heat transfer in and out of your
water condense from each cubic meter of air? (b) body are balanced? (b) Is this consistent with your
How much heat transfer occurs by this experience in getting warm while exercising?
condensation? (c) What temperature increase 71. Integrated Concepts
could this cause in dry air? A 76.0-kg person suffering from hypothermia
67. Integrated Concepts comes indoors and shivers vigorously. How long
Large meteors sometimes strike the Earth, does it take the heat transfer to increase the
converting most of their kinetic energy into person’s body temperature by if all other
thermal energy. (a) What is the kinetic energy of a forms of heat transfer are balanced?
meteor moving at 25.0 km/s? (b) If this 72. Integrated Concepts
meteor lands in a deep ocean and of its In certain large geographic regions, the underlying
kinetic energy goes into heating water, how many rock is hot. Wells can be drilled and water
kilograms of water could it raise by (c) circulated through the rock for heat transfer for
Discuss how the energy of the meteor is more the generation of electricity. (a) Calculate the heat
likely to be deposited in the ocean and the likely transfer that can be extracted by cooling
effects of that energy. of granite by . (b) How long will
this take if heat is transferred at a rate of 300 MW,
assuming no heat transfers back into the 1.00 km
of rock by its surroundings?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 639
14 • Problems & Exercises 621
73. Integrated Concepts 78. Unreasonable Results
Heat transfers from your lungs and breathing (a) Calculate the rate of heat transfer by
passages by evaporating water. (a) Calculate the conduction through a window with an area of
maximum number of grams of water that can be that is 0.750 cm thick, if its inner surface
evaporated when you inhale 1.50 L of air is at and its outer surface is at . (b)
with an original relative humidity of 40.0%. What is unreasonable about this result? (c) Which
(Assume that body temperature is also .) (b) premise or assumption is responsible?
How many joules of energy are required to 79. Unreasonable Results
evaporate this amount? (c) What is the rate of heat A meteorite 1.20 cm in diameter is so hot
transfer in watts from this method, if you breathe immediately after penetrating the atmosphere
at a normal resting rate of 10.0 breaths per that it radiates 20.0 kW of power. (a) What is its
minute? temperature, if the surroundings are at and
74. Integrated Concepts it has an emissivity of 0.800? (b) What is
(a) What is the temperature increase of water unreasonable about this result? (c) Which premise
falling 55.0 m over Niagara Falls? (b) What fraction or assumption is responsible?
must evaporate to keep the temperature 80. Construct Your Own Problem
constant? Consider a new model of commercial airplane
75. Integrated Concepts having its brakes tested as a part of the initial
Hot air rises because it has expanded. It then flight permission procedure. The airplane is
displaces a greater volume of cold air, which brought to takeoff speed and then stopped with
increases the buoyant force on it. (a) Calculate the the brakes alone. Construct a problem in which
ratio of the buoyant force to the weight of you calculate the temperature increase of the
air surrounded by air. (b) What energy is brakes during this process. You may assume most
needed to cause of air to go from of the kinetic energy of the airplane is converted to
to ? (c) What gravitational potential energy thermal energy in the brakes and surrounding
is gained by this volume of air if it rises 1.00 m? materials, and that little escapes. Note that the
Will this cause a significant cooling of the air? brakes are expected to become so hot in this
76. Unreasonable Results procedure that they ignite and, in order to pass the
(a) What is the temperature increase of an 80.0 kg test, the airplane must be able to withstand the
person who consumes 2500 kcal of food in one fire for some time without a general conflagration.
day with 95.0% of the energy transferred as heat 81. Construct Your Own Problem
to the body? (b) What is unreasonable about this Consider a person outdoors on a cold night.
result? (c) Which premise or assumption is Construct a problem in which you calculate the
responsible? rate of heat transfer from the person by all three
77. Unreasonable Results heat transfer methods. Make the initial
An Arctic inventor surrounded by ice thinks it circumstances such that at rest the person will
would be much less mechanically complex to cool have a net heat transfer and then decide how
a car engine by melting ice on it than by having a much physical activity of a chosen type is
water-cooled system with a radiator, water pump, necessary to balance the rate of heat transfer.
antifreeze, and so on. (a) If of the energy in Among the things to consider are the size of the
1.00 gal of gasoline is converted into “waste heat” person, type of clothing, initial metabolic rate, sky
in a car engine, how many kilograms of ice conditions, amount of water evaporated, and
could it melt? (b) Is this a reasonable amount of volume of air breathed. Of course, there are many
ice to carry around to cool the engine for 1.00 gal other factors to consider and your instructor may
of gasoline consumption? (c) What premises or wish to guide you in the assumptions made as well
assumptions are unreasonable? as the detail of analysis and method of presenting
your results.
PAGE: 640
622 14 • Problems & Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 641
CHAPTER 15
Thermodynamics
FIGURE15.1A steam engine uses heat transfer to do work. (credit: Gerald Friedrich, Pixabay)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
15.1The First Law of Thermodynamics
15.2The First Law of Thermodynamics and Some Simple Processes
15.3Introduction to the Second Law of Thermodynamics: Heat Engines and Their Efficiency
15.4Carnot’s Perfect Heat Engine: The Second Law of Thermodynamics Restated
15.5Applications of Thermodynamics: Heat Pumps and Refrigerators
15.6Entropy and the Second Law of Thermodynamics: Disorder and the Unavailability of Energy
15.7Statistical Interpretation of Entropy and the Second Law of Thermodynamics: The Underlying Explanation
INTRODUCTION TO THERMODYNAMICS Heat transfer is energy in transit, and it can be used to do work. It can
also be converted to any other form of energy. A car engine, for example, burns fuel for heat transfer into a gas. Work
is done by the gas as it exerts a force through a distance, converting its energy into a variety of other forms—into the
car’s kinetic or gravitational potential energy; into electrical energy to run the spark plugs, radio, and lights; and
back into stored energy in the car’s battery. But most of the heat transfer produced from burning fuel in the engine
does not do work on the gas. Rather, the energy is released into the environment, implying that the engine is quite
inefficient.
It is often said that modern gasoline engines cannot be made to be significantly more efficient. We hear the same
about heat transfer to electrical energy in large power stations, whether they are coal, oil, natural gas, or nuclear
powered. Why is that the case? Is the inefficiency caused by design problems that could be solved with better
engineering and superior materials? Is it part of some money-making conspiracy by those who sell energy? Actually,
the truth is more interesting, and reveals much about the nature of heat transfer.
Basic physical laws govern how heat transfer for doing work takes place and place insurmountable limits onto its
efficiency. This chapter will explore these laws as well as many applications and concepts associated with them.
These topics are part ofthermodynamics—the study of heat transfer and its relationship to doing work.
PAGE: 642
624 15 • Thermodynamics
15.1 The First Law of Thermodynamics
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define the first law of thermodynamics.
• Describe how conservation of energy relates to the first law of thermodynamics.
• Identify instances of the first law of thermodynamics working in everyday situations, including biological
metabolism.
• Calculate changes in the internal energy of a system, after accounting for heat transfer and work done.
FIGURE15.2This boiling tea kettle represents energy in motion. The water in the kettle is turning to water vapor because heat is being
transferred from the stove to the kettle. As the entire system gets hotter, work is done—from the evaporation of the water to the whistling of
the kettle. (credit: Gina Hamilton)
If we are interested in how heat transfer is converted into doing work, then the conservation of energy principle is
important. The first law of thermodynamics applies the conservation of energy principle to systems where heat
transfer and doing work are the methods of transferring energy into and out of the system. Thefirst law of
thermodynamicsstates that the change in internal energy of a system equals the net heat transferintothe system
minus the net work donebythe system. In equation form, the first law of thermodynamics is
15.1
Here is thechange in internal energy of the system. is thenet heat transferred into the system—that is,
is the sum of all heat transfer into and out of the system. is thenet work done by the system—that is, is the
sum of all work done on or by the system. We use the following sign conventions: if is positive, then there is a net
heat transfer into the system; if is positive, then there is net work done by the system. So positive adds energy
to the system and positive takes energy from the system. Thus . Note also that if more heat
transfer into the system occurs than work done, the difference is stored as internal energy. Heat engines are a good
example of this—heat transfer into them takes place so that they can do work. (SeeFigure 15.3.) We will now
examine , , and further.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 643
15.1 • The First Law of Thermodynamics 625
FIGURE15.3The first law of thermodynamics is the conservation-of-energy principle stated for a system where heat and work are the
methods of transferring energy for a system in thermal equilibrium. represents the net heat transfer—it is the sum of all heat transfers
into and out of the system. is positive for net heat transferintothe system. is the total work done on and by the system. is positive
when more work is donebythe system than on it. The change in the internal energy of the system, , is related to heat and work by the
first law of thermodynamics, .
Making Connections: Law of Thermodynamics and Law of Conservation of Energy
The first law of thermodynamics is actually the law of conservation of energy stated in a form most useful in
thermodynamics. The first law gives the relationship between heat transfer, work done, and the change in
internal energy of a system.
HeatQand WorkW
Heat transfer ( ) and doing work ( ) are the two everyday means of bringing energy into or taking energy out of a
system. The processes are quite different. Heat transfer, a less organized process, is driven by temperature
differences. Work, a quite organized process, involves a macroscopic force exerted through a distance.
Nevertheless, heat and work can produce identical results.For example, both can cause a temperature increase.
Heat transfer into a system, such as when the Sun warms the air in a bicycle tire, can increase its temperature, and
so can work done on the system, as when the bicyclist pumps air into the tire. Once the temperature increase has
occurred, it is impossible to tell whether it was caused by heat transfer or by doing work. This uncertainty is an
important point. Heat transfer and work are both energy in transit—neither is stored as such in a system. However,
both can change the internal energy of a system. Internal energy is a form of energy completely different from
either heat or work.
Internal EnergyU
We can think about the internal energy of a system in two different but consistent ways. The first is the atomic and
molecular view, which examines the system on the atomic and molecular scale. Theinternal energy of a system
is the sum of the kinetic and potential energies of its atoms and molecules. Recall that kinetic plus potential energy
is called mechanical energy. Thus internal energy is the sum of atomic and molecular mechanical energy. Because it
is impossible to keep track of all individual atoms and molecules, we must deal with averages and distributions. A
second way to view the internal energy of a system is in terms of its macroscopic characteristics, which are very
similar to atomic and molecular average values.
Macroscopically, we define the change in internal energy to be that given by the first law of thermodynamics:
15.2
Many detailed experiments have verified that , where is the change in total kinetic and potential
energy of all atoms and molecules in a system. It has also been determined experimentally that the internal energy
of a system depends only on the state of the system andnot how it reached that state. More specifically, is
found to be a function of a few macroscopic quantities (pressure, volume, and temperature, for example),
independent of past history such as whether there has been heat transfer or work done. This independence means
that if we know the state of a system, we can calculate changes in its internal energy from a few macroscopic
variables.
PAGE: 644
626 15 • Thermodynamics
Making Connections: Macroscopic and Microscopic
In thermodynamics, we often use the macroscopic picture when making calculations of how a system behaves,
while the atomic and molecular picture gives underlying explanations in terms of averages and distributions. We
shall see this again in later sections of this chapter. For example, in the topic of entropy, calculations will be
made using the atomic and molecular view.
To get a better idea of how to think about the internal energy of a system, let us examine a system going from State
1 to State 2. The system has internal energy in State 1, and it has internal energy in State 2, no matter how it
got to either state. So the change in internal energy is independent of what caused the change. In
other words, is independent of path. By path, we mean the method of getting from the starting point to the
ending point. Why is this independence important? Note that . Both and depend on path, but
does not. This path independence means that internal energy is easier to consider than either heat transfer
or work done.
EXAMPLE 15.1
Calculating Change in Internal Energy: The Same Change in is Produced by Two Different
Processes
(a) Suppose there is heat transfer of 40.00 J to a system, while the system does 10.00 J of work. Later, there is heat
transfer of 25.00 J out of the system while 4.00 J of work is done on the system. What is the net change in internal
energy of the system?
(b) What is the change in internal energy of a system when a total of 150.00 J of heat transfer occurs out of (from)
the system and 159.00 J of work is done on the system? (SeeFigure 15.4).
Strategy
In part (a), we must first find the net heat transfer and net work done from the given information. Then the first law
of thermodynamics can be used to find the change in internal energy. In part (b), the net heat
transfer and work done are given, so the equation can be used directly.
Solution for (a)
The net heat transfer is the heat transfer into the system minus the heat transfer out of the system, or
15.3
Similarly, the total work is the work done by the system minus the work done on the system, or
15.4
Thus the change in internal energy is given by the first law of thermodynamics:
15.5
We can also find the change in internal energy for each of the two steps. First, consider 40.00 J of heat transfer in
and 10.00 J of work out, or
15.6
Now consider 25.00 J of heat transfer out and 4.00 J of work in, or
15.7
The total change is the sum of these two steps, or
15.8
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 645
15.1 • The First Law of Thermodynamics 627
Discussion on (a)
No matter whether you look at the overall process or break it into steps, the change in internal energy is the same.
Solution for (b)
Here the net heat transfer and total work are given directly to be and , so that
15.9
Discussion on (b)
A very different process in part (b) produces the same 9.00-J change in internal energy as in part (a). Note that the
change in the system in both parts is related to and not to the individual s or s involved. The system ends
up in thesamestate in both (a) and (b). Parts (a) and (b) present two different paths for the system to follow
between the same starting and ending points, and the change in internal energy for each is the same—it is
independent of path.
FIGURE15.4Two different processes produce the same change in a system. (a) A total of 15.00 J of heat transfer occurs into the system,
while work takes out a total of 6.00 J. The change in internal energy is . (b) Heat transfer removes 150.00 J from
the system while work puts 159.00 J into it, producing an increase of 9.00 J in internal energy. If the system starts out in the same state in
(a) and (b), it will end up in the same final state in either case—its final state is related to internal energy, not how that energy was acquired.
Human Metabolism and the First Law of Thermodynamics
Human metabolismis the conversion of food into heat transfer, work, and stored fat. Metabolism is an interesting
example of the first law of thermodynamics in action. We now take another look at these topics via the first law of
thermodynamics. Considering the body as the system of interest, we can use the first law to examine heat transfer,
doing work, and internal energy in activities ranging from sleep to heavy exercise. What are some of the major
characteristics of heat transfer, doing work, and energy in the body? For one, body temperature is normally kept
constant by heat transfer to the surroundings. This means is negative. Another fact is that the body usually does
work on the outside world. This means is positive. In such situations, then, the body loses internal energy, since
is negative.
PAGE: 646
628 15 • Thermodynamics
Now consider the effects of eating. Eating increases the internal energy of the body by adding chemical potential
energy (this is an unromantic view of a good steak). The bodymetabolizesall the food we consume. Basically,
metabolism is an oxidation process in which the chemical potential energy of food is released. This implies that food
input is in the form of work. Food energy is reported in a special unit, known as the Calorie. This energy is measured
by burning food in a calorimeter, which is how the units are determined.
In chemistry and biochemistry, one calorie (spelled with alowercasec) is defined as the energy (or heat transfer)
required to raise the temperature of one gram of pure water by one degree Celsius. Nutritionists and weight-
watchers tend to use thedietarycalorie, which is frequently called a Calorie (spelled with acapitalC). One food
Calorie is the energy needed to raise the temperature of onekilogramof water by one degree Celsius. This means
that one dietary Calorie is equal to one kilocalorie for the chemist, and one must be careful to avoid confusion
between the two.
Again, consider the internal energy the body has lost. There are three places this internal energy can go—to heat
transfer, to doing work, and to stored fat (a tiny fraction also goes to cell repair and growth). Heat transfer and doing
work take internal energy out of the body, and food puts it back. If you eat just the right amount of food, then your
average internal energy remains constant. Whatever you lose to heat transfer and doing work is replaced by food, so
that, in the long run, . If you overeat repeatedly, then is always positive, and your body stores this extra
internal energy as fat. The reverse is true if you eat too little. If is negative for a few days, then the body
metabolizes its own fat to maintain body temperature and do work that takes energy from the body. This process is
how dieting produces weight loss.
Life is not always this simple, as any dieter knows. The body stores fat or metabolizes it only if energy intake
changes for a period of several days. Once you have been on a major diet, the next one is less successful because
your body alters the way it responds to low energy intake. Your basal metabolic rate (BMR) is the rate at which food
is converted into heat transfer and work done while the body is at complete rest. The body adjusts its basal
metabolic rate to partially compensate for over-eating or under-eating. The body will decrease the metabolic rate
rather than eliminate its own fat to replace lost food intake. You will chill more easily and feel less energetic as a
result of the lower metabolic rate, and you will not lose weight as fast as before. Exercise helps to lose weight,
because it produces both heat transfer from your body and work, and raises your metabolic rate even when you are
at rest. Weight loss is also aided by the quite low efficiency of the body in converting internal energy to work, so that
the loss of internal energy resulting from doing work is much greater than the work done.It should be noted,
however, that living systems are not in thermalequilibrium.
The body provides us with an excellent indication that many thermodynamic processes areirreversible. An
irreversible process can go in one direction but not the reverse, under a given set of conditions. For example,
although body fat can be converted to do work and produce heat transfer, work done on the body and heat transfer
into it cannot be converted to body fat. Otherwise, we could skip lunch by sunning ourselves or by walking down
stairs. Another example of an irreversible thermodynamic process is photosynthesis. This process is the intake of
one form of energy—light—by plants and its conversion to chemical potential energy. Both applications of the first
law of thermodynamics are illustrated inFigure 15.5. One great advantage of conservation laws such as the first law
of thermodynamics is that they accurately describe the beginning and ending points of complex processes, such as
metabolism and photosynthesis, without regard to the complications in between.Table 15.1presents a summary of
terms relevant to the first law of thermodynamics.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 647
15.2 • The First Law of Thermodynamics and Some Simple Processes 629
FIGURE15.5(a) The first law of thermodynamics applied to metabolism. Heat transferred out of the body ( ) and work done by the body (
) remove internal energy, while food intake replaces it. (Food intake may be considered as work done on the body.) (b) Plants convert
part of the radiant heat transfer in sunlight to stored chemical energy, a process called photosynthesis.
Term Definition
Internal energy—the sum of the kinetic and potential energies of a system’s atoms and molecules. Can
be divided into many subcategories, such as thermal and chemical energy. Depends only on the state of
a system (such as its , , and ), not on how the energy entered the system. Change in internal energy
is path independent.
Heat—energy transferred because of a temperature difference. Characterized by random molecular
motion. Highly dependent on path. entering a system is positive.
Work—energy transferred by a force moving through a distance. An organized, orderly process. Path
dependent. done by a system (either against an external force or to increase the volume of the
system) is positive.
TABLE15.1Summary of Terms for the First Law of Thermodynamics,ΔU=Q−W
15.2 The First Law of Thermodynamics and Some Simple Processes
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the processes of a simple heat engine.
• Explain the differences among the simple thermodynamic processes—isobaric, isochoric, isothermal, and
adiabatic.
• Calculate total work done in a cyclical thermodynamic process.
PAGE: 648
630 15 • Thermodynamics
FIGURE15.6Beginning with the Industrial Revolution, humans have harnessed power through the use of the first law of thermodynamics,
before we even understood it completely. This photo, of a steam engine at the Turbinia Works, dates from 1911, a mere 61 years after the
first explicit statement of the first law of thermodynamics by Rudolph Clausius. (credit: public domain; author unknown)
One of the most important things we can do with heat transfer is to use it to do work for us. Such a device is called a
heat engine. Car engines and steam turbines that generate electricity are examples of heat engines.Figure 15.7
shows schematically how the first law of thermodynamics applies to the typical heat engine.
FIGURE15.7Schematic representation of a heat engine, governed, of course, by the first law of thermodynamics. It is impossible to devise
a system where , that is, in which no heat transfer occurs to the environment.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 649
15.2 • The First Law of Thermodynamics and Some Simple Processes 631
FIGURE15.8(a) Heat transfer to the gas in a cylinder increases the internal energy of the gas, creating higher pressure and temperature.
(b) The force exerted on the movable cylinder does work as the gas expands. Gas pressure and temperature decrease when it expands,
indicating that the gas’s internal energy has been decreased by doing work. (c) Heat transfer to the environment further reduces pressure in
the gas so that the piston can be more easily returned to its starting position.
The illustrations above show one of the ways in which heat transfer does work. Fuel combustion produces heat
transfer to a gas in a cylinder, increasing the pressure of the gas and thereby the force it exerts on a movable piston.
The gas does work on the outside world, as this force moves the piston through some distance. Heat transfer to the
gas cylinder results in work being done. To repeat this process, the piston needs to be returned to its starting point.
Heat transfer now occurs from the gas to the surroundings so that its pressure decreases, and a force is exerted by
the surroundings to push the piston back through some distance. Variations of this process are employed daily in
hundreds of millions of heat engines. We will examine heat engines in detail in the next section. In this section, we
consider some of the simpler underlying processes on which heat engines are based.
PVDiagrams and their Relationship to Work Done on or by a Gas
A process by which a gas does work on a piston at constant pressure is called anisobaric process. Since the
pressure is constant, the force exerted is constant and the work done is given as
15.10
PAGE: 650
632 15 • Thermodynamics
FIGURE15.9An isobaric expansion of a gas requires heat transfer to keep the pressure constant. Since pressure is constant, the work done
is .
15.11
See the symbols as shown inFigure 15.9. Now , and so
15.12
Because the volume of a cylinder is its cross-sectional area times its length , we see that , the change
in volume; thus,
15.13
Note that if is positive, then is positive, meaning that work is donebythe gas on the outside world.
(Note that the pressure involved in this work that we’ve called is the pressure of the gasinsidethe tank. If we call
the pressure outside the tank , an expanding gas would be workingagainstthe external pressure; the work done
would therefore be (isobaric process). Many texts use this definition of work, and not the definition
based on internal pressure, as the basis of the First Law of Thermodynamics. This definition reverses the sign
conventions for work, and results in a statement of the first law that becomes .)
It is not surprising that , since we have already noted in our treatment of fluids that pressure is a type of
potential energy per unit volume and that pressure in fact has units of energy divided by volume. We also noted in
our discussion of the ideal gas law that has units of energy. In this case, some of the energy associated with
pressure becomes work.
Figure 15.10shows a graph of pressure versus volume (that is, a diagram for an isobaric process. You can see in
the figure that the work done is the area under the graph. This property of diagrams is very useful and broadly
applicable:the work done on or by a system in going from one state to another equals the area under the curve on a
diagram.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 651
15.2 • The First Law of Thermodynamics and Some Simple Processes 633
FIGURE15.10A graph of pressure versus volume for a constant-pressure, or isobaric, process, such as the one shown inFigure 15.9. The
area under the curve equals the work done by the gas, since .
FIGURE15.11(a) A diagram in which pressure varies as well as volume. The work done for each interval is its average pressure times
the change in volume, or the area under the curve over that interval. Thus the total area under the curve equals the total work done. (b)
Work must be done on the system to follow the reverse path. This is interpreted as a negative area under the curve.
We can see where this leads by consideringFigure 15.11(a), which shows a more general process in which both
pressure and volume change. The area under the curve is closely approximated by dividing it into strips, each having
an average constant pressure . The work done is for each strip, and the total work done is
the sum of the . Thus the total work done is the total area under the curve. If the path is reversed, as inFigure
15.11(b), then work is done on the system. The area under the curve in that case is negative, because is
negative.
diagrams clearly illustrate thatthe work done depends on the path taken and not just the endpoints. This path
dependence is seen inFigure 15.12(a), where more work is done in going from A to C by the path via point B than by
the path via point D. The vertical paths, where volume is constant, are calledisochoricprocesses. Since volume is
constant, , and no work is done in an isochoric process. Now, if the system follows the cyclical path ABCDA,
as inFigure 15.12(b), then the total work done is the area inside the loop. The negative area below path CD
subtracts, leaving only the area inside the rectangle. In fact, the work done in any cyclical process (one that returns
to its starting point) is the area inside the loop it forms on a diagram, asFigure 15.12(c) illustrates for a general
cyclical process. Note that the loop must be traversed in the clockwise direction for work to be positive—that is, for
PAGE: 652
634 15 • Thermodynamics
there to be a net work output.
FIGURE15.12(a) The work done in going from A to C depends on path. The work is greater for the path ABC than for the path ADC,
because the former is at higher pressure. In both cases, the work done is the area under the path. This area is greater for path ABC. (b) The
total work done in the cyclical process ABCDA is the area inside the loop, since the negative area below CD subtracts out, leaving just the
area inside the rectangle. (The values given for the pressures and the change in volume are intended for use in the example below.) (c) The
area inside any closed loop is the work done in the cyclical process. If the loop is traversed in a clockwise direction, is positive—it is
work done on the outside environment. If the loop is traveled in a counter-clockwise direction, is negative—it is work that is done to the
system.
EXAMPLE 15.2
Total Work Done in a Cyclical Process Equals the Area Inside the Closed Loop on aPV
Diagram
Calculate the total work done in the cyclical process ABCDA shown inFigure 15.12(b) by the following two methods
to verify that work equals the area inside the closed loop on the diagram. (Take the data in the figure to be
precise to three significant figures.) (a) Calculate the work done along each segment of the path and add these
values to get the total work. (b) Calculate the area inside the rectangle ABCDA.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 653
15.2 • The First Law of Thermodynamics and Some Simple Processes 635
Strategy
To find the work along any path on a diagram, you use the fact that work is pressure times change in volume, or
. So in part (a), this value is calculated for each leg of the path around the closed loop.
Solution for (a)
The work along path AB is
15.14
× ×
Since the path BC is isochoric, , and so . The work along path CD is negative, since is
negative (the volume decreases). The work is
15.15
× ×
Again, since the path DA is isochoric, , and so . Now the total work is
15.16
Solution for (b)
The area inside the rectangle is its height times its width, or
× × × 15.17
Thus,
15.18
Discussion
The result, as anticipated, is that the area inside the closed loop equals the work done. The area is often easier to
calculate than is the work done along each path. It is also convenient to visualize the area inside different curves on
diagrams in order to see which processes might produce the most work. Recall that work can be done to the
system, or by the system, depending on the sign of . A positive is work that is done by the system on the
outside environment; a negative represents work done by the environment on the system.
Figure 15.13(a) shows two other important processes on a diagram. For comparison, both are shown starting
from the same point A. The upper curve ending at point B is anisothermalprocess—that is, one in which
temperature is kept constant. If the gas behaves like an ideal gas, as is often the case, and if no phase change
occurs, then . Since is constant, is a constant for an isothermal process. We ordinarily expect the
temperature of a gas to decrease as it expands, and so we correctly suspect that heat transfer must occur from the
surroundings to the gas to keep the temperature constant during an isothermal expansion. To show this more
rigorously for the special case of a monatomic ideal gas, we note that the average kinetic energy of an atom in such
a gas is given by
15.19
The kinetic energy of the atoms in a monatomic ideal gas is its only form of internal energy, and so its total internal
energy is
15.20
PAGE: 654
636 15 • Thermodynamics
where is the number of atoms in the gas. This relationship means that the internal energy of an ideal monatomic
gas is constant during an isothermal process—that is, . If the internal energy does not change, then the net
heat transfer into the gas must equal the net work done by the gas. That is, because here,
. We must have just enough heat transfer to replace the work done. An isothermal process is inherently
slow, because heat transfer occurs continuously to keep the gas temperature constant at all times and must be
allowed to spread through the gas so that there are no hot or cold regions.
Note that diatomic gases, such as those in air, have different formulas for average kinetic energy of an atom and
total internal energy.
Also shown inFigure 15.13(a) is a curve AC for anadiabaticprocess, defined to be one in which there is no heat
transfer—that is, . Processes that are nearly adiabatic can be achieved either by using very effective insulation
or by performing the process so fast that there is little time for heat transfer. Temperature must decrease during an
adiabatic expansion process, since work is done at the expense of internal energy:
15.21
(You might have noted that a gas released into atmospheric pressure from a pressurized cylinder is substantially
colder than the gas in the cylinder.) In fact, because for an adiabatic process. Lower temperature
results in lower pressure along the way, so that curve AC is lower than curve AB, and less work is done. If the path
ABCA could be followed by cooling the gas from B to C at constant volume (isochorically),Figure 15.13(b), there
would be a net work output.
FIGURE15.13(a) The upper curve is an isothermal process ( ), whereas the lower curve is an adiabatic process ( ). Both start
from the same point A, but the isothermal process does more work than the adiabatic because heat transfer into the gas takes place to
keep its temperature constant. This keeps the pressure higher all along the isothermal path than along the adiabatic path, producing more
work. The adiabatic path thus ends up with a lower pressure and temperature at point C, even though the final volume is the same as for
the isothermal process. (b) The cycle ABCA produces a net work output.
Reversible Processes
Both isothermal and adiabatic processes such as shown inFigure 15.13are reversible in principle. Areversible
processis one in which both the system and its environment can return to exactly the states they were in by
following the reverse path. The reverse isothermal and adiabatic paths are BA and CA, respectively. Real
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 655
15.3 • Introduction to the Second Law of Thermodynamics: Heat Engines and Their Efficiency 637
macroscopic processes are never exactly reversible. In the previous examples, our system is a gas (like that in
Figure 15.9), and its environment is the piston, cylinder, and the rest of the universe. If there are any energy-
dissipating mechanisms, such as friction or turbulence, then heat transfer to the environment occurs for either
direction of the piston. So, for example, if the path BA is followed and there is friction, then the gas will be returned
to its original state but the environment will not—it will have been heated in both directions. Reversibility requires
the direction of heat transfer to reverse for the reverse path. Since dissipative mechanisms cannot be completely
eliminated, real processes cannot be reversible.
There must be reasons that real macroscopic processes cannot be reversible. We can imagine them going in
reverse. For example, heat transfer occurs spontaneously from hot to cold and never spontaneously the reverse. Yet
it would not violate the first law of thermodynamics for this to happen. In fact, all spontaneous processes, such as
bubbles bursting, never go in reverse. There is a second thermodynamic law that forbids them from going in reverse.
When we study this law, we will learn something about nature and also find that such a law limits the efficiency of
heat engines. We will find that heat engines with the greatest possible theoretical efficiency would have to use
reversible processes, and even they cannot convert all heat transfer into doing work.Table 15.2summarizes the
simpler thermodynamic processes and their definitions.
Isobaric Constant pressure
Isochoric Constant volume
Isothermal Constant temperature
Adiabatic No heat transfer
TABLE15.2Summary of Simple
Thermodynamic Processes
PHET EXPLORATIONS
States of Matter
Watch different types of molecules form a solid, liquid, or gas. Add or remove heat and watch the phase change.
Change the temperature or volume of a container and see a pressure-temperature diagram respond in real time.
Relate the interaction potential to the forces between molecules.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/15-2-the-first-law-of-
thermodynamics-and-some-simple-processes)
15.3 Introduction to the Second Law of Thermodynamics: Heat Engines and
Their Efficiency
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• State the expressions of the second law of thermodynamics.
• Calculate the efficiency and carbon dioxide emission of a coal-fired electricity plant, using second law
characteristics.
• Describe and define the Otto cycle.
PAGE: 656
638 15 • Thermodynamics
FIGURE15.14These ice floes melt during the Arctic summer. Some of them refreeze in the winter, but the second law of thermodynamics
predicts that it would be extremely unlikely for the water molecules contained in these particular floes to reform the distinctive alligator-
like shape they formed when the picture was taken in the summer of 2009. (credit: Patrick Kelley, U.S. Coast Guard, U.S. Geological Survey)
The second law of thermodynamics deals with the direction taken by spontaneous processes. Many processes occur
spontaneously in one direction only—that is, they are irreversible, under a given set of conditions. Although
irreversibility is seen in day-to-day life—a broken glass does not resume its original state, for instance—complete
irreversibility is a statistical statement that cannot be seen during the lifetime of the universe. More precisely, an
irreversible processis one that depends on path. If the process can go in only one direction, then the reverse path
differs fundamentally and the process cannot be reversible. For example, as noted in the previous section, heat
involves the transfer of energy from higher to lower temperature. A cold object in contact with a hot one never gets
colder, transferring heat to the hot object and making it hotter. Furthermore, mechanical energy, such as kinetic
energy, can be completely converted to thermal energy by friction, but the reverse is impossible. A hot stationary
object never spontaneously cools off and starts moving. Yet another example is the expansion of a puff of gas
introduced into one corner of a vacuum chamber. The gas expands to fill the chamber, but it never regroups in the
corner. The random motion of the gas molecules could take them all back to the corner, but this is never observed to
happen. (SeeFigure 15.15.)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 657
15.3 • Introduction to the Second Law of Thermodynamics: Heat Engines and Their Efficiency 639
FIGURE15.15Examples of one-way processes in nature. (a) Heat transfer occurs spontaneously from hot to cold and not from cold to hot.
(b) The brakes of this car convert its kinetic energy to heat transfer to the environment. The reverse process is impossible. (c) The burst of
gas let into this vacuum chamber quickly expands to uniformly fill every part of the chamber. The random motions of the gas molecules will
never return them to the corner.
The fact that certain processes never occur suggests that there is a law forbidding them to occur. The first law of
thermodynamics would allow them to occur—none of those processes violate conservation of energy. The law that
forbids these processes is called the second law of thermodynamics. We shall see that the second law can be stated
in many ways that may seem different, but which in fact are equivalent. Like all natural laws, the second law of
thermodynamics gives insights into nature, and its several statements imply that it is broadly applicable,
fundamentally affecting many apparently disparate processes.
The already familiar direction of heat transfer from hot to cold is the basis of our first version of thesecond law of
thermodynamics.
The Second Law of Thermodynamics (first expression)
Heat transfer occurs spontaneously from higher- to lower-temperature bodies but never spontaneously in the
reverse direction.
Another way of stating this: It is impossible for any process to have as its sole result heat transfer from a cooler to a
hotter object.
Heat Engines
Now let us consider a device that uses heat transfer to do work. As noted in the previous section, such a device is
called a heat engine, and one is shown schematically inFigure 15.16(b). Gasoline and diesel engines, jet engines,
and steam turbines are all heat engines that do work by using part of the heat transfer from some source. Heat
transfer from the hot object (or hot reservoir) is denoted as , while heat transfer into the cold object (or cold
reservoir) is , and the work done by the engine is . The temperatures of the hot and cold reservoirs are and
, respectively.
PAGE: 658
640 15 • Thermodynamics
FIGURE15.16(a) Heat transfer occurs spontaneously from a hot object to a cold one, consistent with the second law of thermodynamics.
(b) A heat engine, represented here by a circle, uses part of the heat transfer to do work. The hot and cold objects are called the hot and
cold reservoirs. is the heat transfer out of the hot reservoir, is the work output, and is the heat transfer into the cold reservoir.
Because the hot reservoir is heated externally, which is energy intensive, it is important that the work is done as
efficiently as possible. In fact, we would like to equal , and for there to be no heat transfer to the environment
( ). Unfortunately, this is impossible. Thesecond law of thermodynamicsalso states, with regard to using
heat transfer to do work (the second expression of the second law):
The Second Law of Thermodynamics (second expression)
It is impossible in any system for heat transfer from a reservoir to completely convert to work in a cyclical
process in which the system returns to its initial state.
Acyclical processbrings a system, such as the gas in a cylinder, back to its original state at the end of every cycle.
Most heat engines, such as reciprocating piston engines and rotating turbines, use cyclical processes. The second
law, just stated in its second form, clearly states that such engines cannot have perfect conversion of heat transfer
into work done. Before going into the underlying reasons for the limits on converting heat transfer into work, we
need to explore the relationships among , , and , and to define the efficiency of a cyclical heat engine. As
noted, a cyclical process brings the system back to its original condition at the end of every cycle. Such a system’s
internal energy is the same at the beginning and end of every cycle—that is, . The first law of
thermodynamics states that
15.22
where is thenetheat transfer during the cycle ( ) and is the net work done by the system. Since
for a complete cycle, we have
15.23
so that
15.24
Thus the net work done by the system equals the net heat transfer into the system, or
15.25
just as shown schematically inFigure 15.16(b). The problem is that in all processes, there is some heat transfer
to the environment—and usually a very significant amount at that.
In the conversion of energy to work, we are always faced with the problem of getting less out than we put in. We
defineconversion efficiency to be the ratio of useful work output to the energy input (or, in other words, the
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 659
15.3 • Introduction to the Second Law of Thermodynamics: Heat Engines and Their Efficiency 641
ratio of what we get to what we spend). In that spirit, we define the efficiency of a heat engine to be its net work
output divided by heat transfer to the engine ; that is,
15.26
Since in a cyclical process, we can also express this as
15.27
making it clear that an efficiency of 1, or 100%, is possible only if there is no heat transfer to the environment
( ). Note that all s are positive. The direction of heat transfer is indicated by a plus or minus sign. For
example, is out of the system and so is preceded by a minus sign.
EXAMPLE 15.3
Daily Work Done by a Coal-Fired Power Station, Its Efficiency and Carbon Dioxide Emissions
A coal-fired power station is a huge heat engine. It uses heat transfer from burning coal to do work to turn turbines,
which are used to generate electricity. In a single day, a large coal power station has of heat transfer
from coal and of heat transfer into the environment. (a) What is the work done by the power station?
(b) What is the efficiency of the power station? (c) In the combustion process, the following chemical reaction
occurs: . This implies that every 12 kg of coal puts 12 kg + 16 kg + 16 kg = 44 kg of carbon dioxide into
the atmosphere. Assuming that 1 kg of coal can provide of heat transfer upon combustion, how much
is emitted per day by this power plant?
Strategy for (a)
We can use to find the work output , assuming a cyclical process is used in the power station. In
this process, water is boiled under pressure to form high-temperature steam, which is used to run steam turbine-
generators, and then condensed back to water to start the cycle again.
Solution for (a)
Work output is given by:
15.28
Substituting the given values:
× ×
15.29
Strategy for (b)
The efficiency can be calculated with since is given and work was found in the first part of this
example.
Solution for (b)
Efficiency is given by: . The work was just found to be , and is given, so the
efficiency is
15.30
PAGE: 660
642 15 • Thermodynamics
Strategy for (c)
The daily consumption of coal is calculated using the information that each day there is × of heat
transfer from coal. In the combustion process, we have . So every 12 kg of coal puts 12 kg + 16 kg + 16
kg = 44 kg of into the atmosphere.
Solution for (c)
The daily coal consumption is
×
× 15.31
×
Assuming that the coal is pure and that all the coal goes toward producing carbon dioxide, the carbon dioxide
produced per day is
× × × 15.32
This is 370,000 metric tons of produced every day.
Discussion
If all the work output is converted to electricity in a period of one day, the average power output is 1180 MW (this is
left to you as an end-of-chapter problem). This value is about the size of a large-scale conventional power plant. The
efficiency found is acceptably close to the value of 42% given for coal power stations. It means that fully 59.2% of
the energy is heat transfer to the environment, which usually results in warming lakes, rivers, or the ocean near the
power station, and is implicated in a warming planet generally. While the laws of thermodynamics limit the
efficiency of such plants—including plants fired by nuclear fuel, oil, and natural gas—the heat transfer to the
environment could be, and sometimes is, used for heating homes or for industrial processes. The generally low cost
of energy has not made it economical to make better use of the waste heat transfer from most heat engines. Coal-
fired power plants produce the greatest amount of per unit energy output (compared to natural gas or oil),
making coal the least efficient fossil fuel.
With the information given inExample 15.3, we can find characteristics such as the efficiency of a heat engine
without any knowledge of how the heat engine operates, but looking further into the mechanism of the engine will
give us greater insight.Figure 15.17illustrates the operation of the common four-stroke gasoline engine. The four
steps shown complete this heat engine’s cycle, bringing the gasoline-air mixture back to its original condition.
TheOtto cycleshown inFigure 15.18(a) is used in four-stroke internal combustion engines, although in fact the true
Otto cycle paths do not correspond exactly to the strokes of the engine.
The adiabatic process AB corresponds to the nearly adiabatic compression stroke of the gasoline engine. In both
cases, work is done on the system (the gas mixture in the cylinder), increasing its temperature and pressure. Along
path BC of the Otto cycle, heat transfer into the gas occurs at constant volume, causing a further increase in
pressure and temperature. This process corresponds to burning fuel in an internal combustion engine, and takes
place so rapidly that the volume is nearly constant. Path CD in the Otto cycle is an adiabatic expansion that does
work on the outside world, just as the power stroke of an internal combustion engine does in its nearly adiabatic
expansion. The work done by the system along path CD is greater than the work done on the system along path AB,
because the pressure is greater, and so there is a net work output. Along path DA in the Otto cycle, heat transfer
from the gas at constant volume reduces its temperature and pressure, returning it to its original state. In an internal
combustion engine, this process corresponds to the exhaust of hot gases and the intake of an air-gasoline mixture at
a considerably lower temperature. In both cases, heat transfer into the environment occurs along this final path.
The net work done by a cyclical process is the area inside the closed path on a diagram, such as that inside path
ABCDA inFigure 15.18. Note that in every imaginable cyclical process, it is absolutely necessary for heat transfer
from the system to occur in order to get a net work output. In the Otto cycle, heat transfer occurs along path DA. If
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 661
15.3 • Introduction to the Second Law of Thermodynamics: Heat Engines and Their Efficiency 643
no heat transfer occurs, then the return path is the same, and the net work output is zero. The lower the
temperature on the path AB, the less work has to be done to compress the gas. The area inside the closed path is
then greater, and so the engine does more work and is thus more efficient. Similarly, the higher the temperature
along path CD, the more work output there is. (SeeFigure 15.19.) So efficiency is related to the temperatures of the
hot and cold reservoirs. In the next section, we shall see what the absolute limit to the efficiency of a heat engine is,
and how it is related to temperature.
FIGURE15.17In the four-stroke internal combustion gasoline engine, heat transfer into work takes place in the cyclical process shown
here. The piston is connected to a rotating crankshaft, which both takes work out of and does work on the gas in the cylinder. (a) Air is
mixed with fuel during the intake stroke. (b) During the compression stroke, the air-fuel mixture is rapidly compressed in a nearly adiabatic
process, as the piston rises with the valves closed. Work is done on the gas. (c) The power stroke has two distinct parts. First, the air-fuel
mixture is ignited, converting chemical potential energy into thermal energy almost instantaneously, which leads to a great increase in
pressure. Then the piston descends, and the gas does work by exerting a force through a distance in a nearly adiabatic process. (d) The
exhaust stroke expels the hot gas to prepare the engine for another cycle, starting again with the intake stroke.
FIGURE15.18 diagram for a simplified Otto cycle, analogous to that employed in an internal combustion engine. Point A corresponds to
the start of the compression stroke of an internal combustion engine. Paths AB and CD are adiabatic and correspond to the compression
and power strokes of an internal combustion engine, respectively. Paths BC and DA are isochoric and accomplish similar results to the
ignition and exhaust-intake portions, respectively, of the internal combustion engine’s cycle. Work is done on the gas along path AB, but
more work is done by the gas along path CD, so that there is a net work output.
FIGURE15.19This Otto cycle produces a greater work output than the one inFigure 15.18, because the starting temperature of path CD is
higher and the starting temperature of path AB is lower. The area inside the loop is greater, corresponding to greater net work output.
PAGE: 662
644 15 • Thermodynamics
15.4 Carnot’s Perfect Heat Engine: The Second Law of Thermodynamics
Restated
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Identify a Carnot cycle.
• Calculate maximum theoretical efficiency of a nuclear reactor.
• Explain how dissipative processes affect the ideal Carnot engine.
FIGURE15.20This novelty toy, known as the drinking bird, is an example of Carnot’s engine. It contains methylene chloride (mixed with a
dye) in the abdomen, which boils at a very low temperature—about . To operate, one gets the bird’s head wet. As the water
evaporates, fluid moves up into the head, causing the bird to become top-heavy and dip forward back into the water. This cools down the
methylene chloride in the head, and it moves back into the abdomen, causing the bird to become bottom heavy and tip up. Except for a very
small input of energy—the original head-wetting—the bird becomes a perpetual motion machine of sorts. (credit: Arabesk.nl, Wikimedia
Commons)
We know from the second law of thermodynamics that a heat engine cannot be 100% efficient, since there must
always be some heat transfer to the environment, which is often called waste heat. How efficient, then, can a
heat engine be? This question was answered at a theoretical level in 1824 by a young French engineer, Sadi Carnot
(1796–1832), in his study of the then-emerging heat engine technology crucial to the Industrial Revolution. He
devised a theoretical cycle, now called theCarnot cycle, which is the most efficient cyclical process possible. The
second law of thermodynamics can be restated in terms of the Carnot cycle, and so what Carnot actually discovered
was this fundamental law. Any heat engine employing the Carnot cycle is called aCarnot engine.
What is crucial to the Carnot cycle—and, in fact, defines it—is that only reversible processes are used. Irreversible
processes involve dissipative factors, such as friction and turbulence. This increases heat transfer to the
environment and reduces the efficiency of the engine. Obviously, then, reversible processes are superior.
Carnot Engine
Stated in terms of reversible processes, thesecond law of thermodynamicshas a third form:
A Carnot engine operating between two given temperatures has the greatest possible efficiency of any heat
engine operating between these two temperatures. Furthermore, all engines employing only reversible
processes have this same maximum efficiency when operating between the same given temperatures.
Figure 15.21shows the diagram for a Carnot cycle. The cycle comprises two isothermal and two adiabatic
processes. Recall that both isothermal and adiabatic processes are, in principle, reversible.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 663
15.4 • Carnot’s Perfect Heat Engine: The Second Law of Thermodynamics Restated 645
Carnot also determined the efficiency of a perfect heat engine—that is, a Carnot engine. It is always true that the
efficiency of a cyclical heat engine is given by:
15.33
What Carnot found was that for a perfect heat engine, the ratio equals the ratio of the absolute temperatures
of the heat reservoirs. That is, for a Carnot engine, so that the maximum orCarnot efficiency
is given by
15.34
where and are in kelvins (or any other absolute temperature scale). No real heat engine can do as well as the
Carnot efficiency—an actual efficiency of about 0.7 of this maximum is usually the best that can be accomplished.
But the ideal Carnot engine, like the drinking bird above, while a fascinating novelty, has zero power. This makes it
unrealistic for any applications.
Carnot’s interesting result implies that 100% efficiency would be possible only if —that is, only if the cold
reservoir were at absolute zero, a practical and theoretical impossibility. But the physical implication is this—the
only way to have all heat transfer go into doing work is to removeallthermal energy, and this requires a cold
reservoir at absolute zero.
It is also apparent that the greatest efficiencies are obtained when the ratio is as small as possible. Just as
discussed for the Otto cycle in the previous section, this means that efficiency is greatest for the highest possible
temperature of the hot reservoir and lowest possible temperature of the cold reservoir. (This setup increases the
area inside the closed loop on the diagram; also, it seems reasonable that the greater the temperature
difference, the easier it is to divert the heat transfer to work.) The actual reservoir temperatures of a heat engine are
usually related to the type of heat source and the temperature of the environment into which heat transfer occurs.
Consider the following example.
FIGURE15.21 diagram for a Carnot cycle, employing only reversible isothermal and adiabatic processes. Heat transfer occurs into
the working substance during the isothermal path AB, which takes place at constant temperature . Heat transfer occurs out of the
working substance during the isothermal path CD, which takes place at constant temperature . The net work output equals the area
inside the path ABCDA. Also shown is a schematic of a Carnot engine operating between hot and cold reservoirs at temperatures and
. Any heat engine using reversible processes and operating between these two temperatures will have the same maximum efficiency as the
Carnot engine.
EXAMPLE 15.4
Maximum Theoretical Efficiency for a Nuclear Reactor
A nuclear power reactor has pressurized water at . (Higher temperatures are theoretically possible but
PAGE: 664
646 15 • Thermodynamics
practically not, due to limitations with materials used in the reactor.) Heat transfer from this water is a complex
process (seeFigure 15.22). Steam, produced in the steam generator, is used to drive the turbine-generators.
Eventually the steam is condensed to water at and then heated again to start the cycle over. Calculate the
maximum theoretical efficiency for a heat engine operating between these two temperatures.
FIGURE15.22Schematic diagram of a pressurized water nuclear reactor and the steam turbines that convert work into electrical energy.
Heat exchange is used to generate steam, in part to avoid contamination of the generators with radioactivity. Two turbines are used
because this is less expensive than operating a single generator that produces the same amount of electrical energy. The steam is
condensed to liquid before being returned to the heat exchanger, to keep exit steam pressure low and aid the flow of steam through the
turbines (equivalent to using a lower-temperature cold reservoir). The considerable energy associated with condensation must be
dissipated into the local environment; in this example, a cooling tower is used so there is no direct heat transfer to an aquatic environment.
(Note that the water going to the cooling tower does not come into contact with the steam flowing over the turbines.)
Strategy
Since temperatures are given for the hot and cold reservoirs of this heat engine, can be used to
calculate the Carnot (maximum theoretical) efficiency. Those temperatures must first be converted to kelvins.
Solution
The hot and cold reservoir temperatures are given as and , respectively. In kelvins, then,
and , so that the maximum efficiency is
15.35
Thus,
15.36
Discussion
A typical nuclear power station’s actual efficiency is about 35%, a little better than 0.7 times the maximum possible
value, a tribute to superior engineering. Electrical power stations fired by coal, oil, and natural gas have greater
actual efficiencies (about 42%), because their boilers can reach higher temperatures and pressures. The cold
reservoir temperature in any of these power stations is limited by the local environment.Figure 15.23shows (a) the
exterior of a nuclear power station and (b) the exterior of a coal-fired power station. Both have cooling towers into
which water from the condenser enters the tower near the top and is sprayed downward, cooled by evaporation.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 665
15.4 • Carnot’s Perfect Heat Engine: The Second Law of Thermodynamics Restated 647
FIGURE15.23(a) A nuclear power station (credit: BlatantWorld.com) and (b) a coal-fired power station. Both have cooling towers in which
water evaporates into the environment, representing . The nuclear reactor, which supplies , is housed inside the dome-shaped
containment buildings. (credit: Robert & Mihaela Vicol, publicphoto.org)
Since all real processes are irreversible, the actual efficiency of a heat engine can never be as great as that of a
Carnot engine, as illustrated inFigure 15.24(a). Even with the best heat engine possible, there are always dissipative
processes in peripheral equipment, such as electrical transformers or car transmissions. These further reduce the
overall efficiency by converting some of the engine’s work output back into heat transfer, as shown inFigure
15.24(b).
PAGE: 666
648 15 • Thermodynamics
FIGURE15.24Real heat engines are less efficient than Carnot engines. (a) Real engines use irreversible processes, reducing the heat
transfer to work. Solid lines represent the actual process; the dashed lines are what a Carnot engine would do between the same two
reservoirs. (b) Friction and other dissipative processes in the output mechanisms of a heat engine convert some of its work output into heat
transfer to the environment.
15.5 Applications of Thermodynamics: Heat Pumps and Refrigerators
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the use of heat engines in heat pumps and refrigerators.
• Demonstrate how a heat pump works to warm an interior space.
• Explain the differences between heat pumps and refrigerators.
• Calculate a heat pump’s coefficient of performance.
FIGURE15.25Almost every home contains a refrigerator. Most people don’t realize they are also sharing their homes with a heat pump.
(credit: Id1337x, Wikimedia Commons)
Heat pumps, air conditioners, and refrigerators utilize heat transfer from cold to hot. They are heat engines run
backward. We say backward, rather than reverse, because except for Carnot engines, all heat engines, though they
can be run backward, cannot truly be reversed. Heat transfer occurs from a cold reservoir and into a hot one.
This requires work input , which is also converted to heat transfer. Thus the heat transfer to the hot reservoir is
. (Note that , , and are positive, with their directions indicated on schematics rather than by
sign.) A heat pump’s mission is for heat transfer to occur into a warm environment, such as a home in the winter.
The mission of air conditioners and refrigerators is for heat transfer to occur from a cool environment, such as
chilling a room or keeping food at lower temperatures than the environment. (Actually, a heat pump can be used
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 667
15.5 • Applications of Thermodynamics: Heat Pumps and Refrigerators 649
both to heat and cool a space. It is essentially an air conditioner and a heating unit all in one. In this section we will
concentrate on its heating mode.)
FIGURE15.26Heat pumps, air conditioners, and refrigerators are heat engines operated backward. The one shown here is based on a
Carnot (reversible) engine. (a) Schematic diagram showing heat transfer from a cold reservoir to a warm reservoir with a heat pump. The
directions of , , and are opposite what they would be in a heat engine. (b) diagram for a Carnot cycle similar to that inFigure
15.27but reversed, following path ADCBA. The area inside the loop is negative, meaning there is a net work input. There is heat transfer
into the system from a cold reservoir along path DC, and heat transfer out of the system into a hot reservoir along path BA.
Heat Pumps
The great advantage of using a heat pump to keep your home warm, rather than just burning fuel, is that a heat
pump supplies . Heat transfer is from the outside air, even at a temperature below freezing, to the
indoor space. You only pay for , and you get an additional heat transfer of from the outside at no cost; in many
cases, at least twice as much energy is transferred to the heated space as is used to run the heat pump. When you
burn fuel to keep warm, you pay for all of it. The disadvantage is that the work input (required by the second law of
thermodynamics) is sometimes more expensive than simply burning fuel, especially if the work is done by electrical
energy.
The basic components of a heat pump in its heating mode are shown inFigure 15.27. A working fluid such as a non-
CFC refrigerant is used. In the outdoor coils (the evaporator), heat transfer occurs to the working fluid from the
cold outdoor air, turning it into a gas.
FIGURE15.27A simple heat pump has four basic components: (1)condenser, (2)expansion valve, (3)evaporator, and (4)compressor. In
the heating mode, heat transfer occurs to the working fluid in the evaporator (3) from the colder outdoor air, turning it into a gas. The
electrically driven compressor (4) increases the temperature and pressure of the gas and forces it into the condenser coils (1) inside the
heated space. Because the temperature of the gas is higher than the temperature in the room, heat transfer from the gas to the room
PAGE: 668
650 15 • Thermodynamics
occurs as the gas condenses to a liquid. The working fluid is then cooled as it flows back through an expansion valve (2) to the outdoor
evaporator coils.
The electrically driven compressor (work input ) raises the temperature and pressure of the gas and forces it into
the condenser coils that are inside the heated space. Because the temperature of the gas is higher than the
temperature inside the room, heat transfer to the room occurs and the gas condenses to a liquid. The liquid then
flows back through a pressure-reducing valve to the outdoor evaporator coils, being cooled through expansion. (In a
cooling cycle, the evaporator and condenser coils exchange roles and the flow direction of the fluid is reversed.)
The quality of a heat pump is judged by how much heat transfer occurs into the warm space compared with how
much work input is required. In the spirit of taking the ratio of what you get to what you spend, we define aheat
pump’s coefficient of performance( ) to be
15.37
Since the efficiency of a heat engine is , we see that , an important and interesting
fact. First, since the efficiency of any heat engine is less than 1, it means that is always greater than 1—that
is, a heat pump always has more heat transfer than work put into it. Second, it means that heat pumps work best
when temperature differences are small. The efficiency of a perfect, or Carnot, engine is ; thus,
the smaller the temperature difference, the smaller the efficiency and the greater the (because
). In other words, heat pumps do not work as well in very cold climates as they do in more
moderate climates.
Friction and other irreversible processes reduce heat engine efficiency, but they donotbenefit the operation of a
heat pump—instead, they reduce the work input by converting part of it to heat transfer back into the cold reservoir
before it gets into the heat pump.
FIGURE15.28When a real heat engine is run backward, some of the intended work input goes into heat transfer before it gets into the
heat engine, thereby reducing its coefficient of performance . In this figure, represents the portion of that goes into the heat
pump, while the remainder of is lost in the form of frictional heat to the cold reservoir. If all of had gone into the heat pump,
then would have been greater. The best heat pump uses adiabatic and isothermal processes, since, in theory, there would be no
dissipative processes to reduce the heat transfer to the hot reservoir.
EXAMPLE 15.5
The BestCOP of a Heat Pump for Home Use
hp
A heat pump used to warm a home must employ a cycle that produces a working fluid at temperatures greater than
typical indoor temperature so that heat transfer to the inside can take place. Similarly, it must produce a working
fluid at temperatures that are colder than the outdoor temperature so that heat transfer occurs from outside. Its hot
and cold reservoir temperatures therefore cannot be too close, placing a limit on its . (SeeFigure 15.29.)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 669
15.5 • Applications of Thermodynamics: Heat Pumps and Refrigerators 651
What is the best coefficient of performance possible for such a heat pump, if it has a hot reservoir temperature of
and a cold reservoir temperature of ?
Strategy
A Carnot engine reversed will give the best possible performance as a heat pump. As noted above,
, so that we need to first calculate the Carnot efficiency to solve this problem.
Solution
Carnot efficiency in terms of absolute temperature is given by:
15.38
The temperatures in kelvins are and , so that
15.39
Thus, from the discussion above,
15.40
or
15.41
so that
15.42
Discussion
This result means that the heat transfer by the heat pump is 5.30 times as much as the work put into it. It would
cost 5.30 times as much for the same heat transfer by an electric room heater as it does for that produced by this
heat pump. This is not a violation of conservation of energy. Cold ambient air provides 4.3 J per 1 J of work from the
electrical outlet.
FIGURE15.29Heat transfer from the outside to the inside, along with work done to run the pump, takes place in the heat pump of the
example above.Note that the cold temperature produced by the heat pump is lower than the outside temperature, so that heat transfer
into the working fluid occurs. The pump’s compressor produces a temperature greater than the indoor temperature in order for heat
transfer into the house to occur.
Real heat pumps do not perform quite as well as the ideal one in the previous example; their values of range
from about 2 to 4. This range means that the heat transfer from the heat pumps is 2 to 4 times as great as the
PAGE: 670
652 15 • Thermodynamics
work put into them. Their economical feasibility is still limited, however, since is usually supplied by electrical
energy that costs more per joule than heat transfer by burning fuels like natural gas. Furthermore, the initial cost of a
heat pump is greater than that of many furnaces, so that a heat pump must last longer for its cost to be recovered.
Heat pumps are most likely to be economically superior where winter temperatures are mild, electricity is relatively
cheap, and other fuels are relatively expensive. Also, since they can cool as well as heat a space, they have
advantages where cooling in summer months is also desired. Thus some of the best locations for heat pumps are in
warm summer climates with cool winters.Figure 15.30shows a heat pump, called a “reverse cycle”or “split-system
cooler”in some countries.
FIGURE15.30In hot weather, heat transfer occurs from air inside the room to air outside, cooling the room. In cool weather, heat transfer
occurs from air outside to air inside, warming the room. This switching is achieved by reversing the direction of flow of the working fluid.
Air Conditioners and Refrigerators
Air conditioners and refrigerators are designed to cool something down in a warm environment. As with heat pumps,
work input is required for heat transfer from cold to hot, and this is expensive. The quality of air conditioners and
refrigerators is judged by how much heat transfer occurs from a cold environment compared with how much
work input is required. What is considered the benefit in a heat pump is considered waste heat in a refrigerator.
We thus define thecoefficient of performance of an air conditioner or refrigerator to be
15.43
Noting again that , we can see that an air conditioner will have a lower coefficient of performance
than a heat pump, because and is greater than . In this module’s Problems and Exercises,
you will show that
15.44
for a heat engine used as either an air conditioner or a heat pump operating between the same two temperatures.
Real air conditioners and refrigerators typically do remarkably well, having values of ranging from 2 to 6.
These numbers are better than the values for the heat pumps mentioned above, because the temperature
differences are smaller, but they are less than those for Carnot engines operating between the same two
temperatures.
A type of rating system called the “energy efficiency rating” ( ) has been developed. This rating is an
example where non-SI units are still used and relevant to consumers. To make it easier for the consumer, Australia,
Canada, New Zealand, and the U.S. use an Energy Star Rating out of 5 stars—the more stars, the more energy
efficient the appliance. are expressed in mixed units of British thermal units (Btu) per hour of heating or
cooling divided by the power input in watts. Room air conditioners are readily available with ranging from 6 to
12. Although not the same as the just described, these are good for comparison purposes—the greater
the , the cheaper an air conditioner is to operate (but the higher its purchase price is likely to be).
The of an air conditioner or refrigerator can be expressed as
15.45
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 671
15.6 • Entropy and the Second Law of Thermodynamics: Disorder and the Unavailability of Energy 653
where is the amount of heat transfer from a cold environment in British thermal units, is time in hours, is
the work input in joules, and is time in seconds.
Problem-Solving Strategies for Thermodynamics
1. Examine the situation to determine whether heat, work, or internal energy are involved. Look for any system
where the primary methods of transferring energy are heat and work. Heat engines, heat pumps,
refrigerators, and air conditioners are examples of such systems.
2. Identify the system of interest and draw a labeled diagram of the system showing energy flow.
3. Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem (identify the unknowns). A written list is
useful. Maximum efficiency means a Carnot engine is involved. Efficiency is not the same as the coefficient
of performance.
4. Make a list of what is given or can be inferred from the problem as stated (identify the knowns). Be sure to
distinguish heat transfer into a system from heat transfer out of the system, as well as work input from work
output. In many situations, it is useful to determine the type of process, such as isothermal or adiabatic.
5. Solve the appropriate equation for the quantity to be determined (the unknown).
6. Substitute the known quantities along with their units into the appropriate equation and obtain numerical
solutions complete with units.
7. Check the answer to see if it is reasonable: Does it make sense?For example, efficiency is always less than
1, whereas coefficients of performance are greater than 1.
15.6 Entropy and the Second Law of Thermodynamics: Disorder and the
Unavailability of Energy
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define entropy and calculate the increase of entropy in a system with reversible and irreversible
processes.
• Explain the expected fate of the universe in entropic terms.
• Calculate the increasing disorder of a system.
FIGURE15.31The ice in this drink is slowly melting. Eventually the liquid will reach thermal equilibrium, as predicted by the second law of
thermodynamics. (credit: Jon Sullivan, PDPhoto.org)
There is yet another way of expressing the second law of thermodynamics. This version relates to a concept called
entropy. By examining it, we shall see that the directions associated with the second law—heat transfer from hot to
cold, for example—are related to the tendency in nature for systems to become disordered and for less energy to be
available for use as work. The entropy of a system can in fact be shown to be a measure of its disorder and of the
unavailability of energy to do work.
PAGE: 672
654 15 • Thermodynamics
Making Connections: Entropy, Energy, and Work
Recall that the simple definition of energy is the ability to do work. Entropy is a measure of how much energy is
not available to do work. Although all forms of energy are interconvertible, and all can be used to do work, it is
not always possible, even in principle, to convert the entire available energy into work. That unavailable energy is
of interest in thermodynamics, because the field of thermodynamics arose from efforts to convert heat to work.
We can see how entropy is defined by recalling our discussion of the Carnot engine. We noted that for a Carnot cycle,
and hence for any reversible processes, . Rearranging terms yields
15.46
for any reversible process. and are absolute values of the heat transfer at temperatures and ,
respectively. This ratio of is defined to be thechange in entropy for a reversible process,
15.47
where is the heat transfer, which is positive for heat transfer into and negative for heat transfer out of, and is
the absolute temperature at which the reversible process takes place. The SI unit for entropy is joules per kelvin (J/
K). If temperature changes during the process, then it is usually a good approximation (for small changes in
temperature) to take to be the average temperature, avoiding the need to use integral calculus to find .
The definition of is strictly valid only for reversible processes, such as used in a Carnot engine. However, we can
find precisely even for real, irreversible processes. The reason is that the entropy of a system, like internal
energy , depends only on the state of the system and not how it reached that condition. Entropy is a property of
state. Thus the change in entropy of a system between state 1 and state 2 is the same no matter how the
change occurs. We just need to find or imagine a reversible process that takes us from state 1 to state 2 and
calculate for that process. That will be the change in entropy for any process going from state 1 to state 2. (See
Figure 15.32.)
FIGURE15.32When a system goes from state 1 to state 2, its entropy changes by the same amount , whether a hypothetical reversible
path is followed or a real irreversible path is taken.
Now let us take a look at the change in entropy of a Carnot engine and its heat reservoirs for one full cycle. The hot
reservoir has a loss of entropy , because heat transfer occurs out of it (remember that when heat
transfers out, then has a negative sign). The cold reservoir has a gain of entropy , because heat
transfer occurs into it. (We assume the reservoirs are sufficiently large that their temperatures are constant.) So the
total change in entropy is
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 673
15.6 • Entropy and the Second Law of Thermodynamics: Disorder and the Unavailability of Energy 655
15.48
Thus, since we know that for a Carnot engine,
15.49
This result, which has general validity, means thatthe total change in entropy for a system in any reversible process
is zero.
The entropy of various parts of the system may change, but the total change is zero. Furthermore, the system does
not affect the entropy of its surroundings, since heat transfer between them does not occur. Thus the reversible
process changes neither the total entropy of the system nor the entropy of its surroundings. Sometimes this is
stated as follows:Reversible processes do not affect the total entropy of the universe.Real processes are not
reversible, though, and they do change total entropy. We can, however, use hypothetical reversible processes to
determine the value of entropy in real, irreversible processes. The following example illustrates this point.
EXAMPLE 15.6
Entropy Increases in an Irreversible (Real) Process
Spontaneous heat transfer from hot to cold is an irreversible process. Calculate the total change in entropy if 4000 J
of heat transfer occurs from a hot reservoir at to a cold reservoir at ,
assuming there is no temperature change in either reservoir. (SeeFigure 15.33.)
Strategy
How can we calculate the change in entropy for an irreversible process when is valid only for
reversible processes? Remember that the total change in entropy of the hot and cold reservoirs will be the same
whether a reversible or irreversible process is involved in heat transfer from hot to cold. So we can calculate the
change in entropy of the hot reservoir for a hypothetical reversible process in which 4000 J of heat transfer occurs
from it; then we do the same for a hypothetical reversible process in which 4000 J of heat transfer occurs to the cold
reservoir. This produces the same changes in the hot and cold reservoirs that would occur if the heat transfer were
allowed to occur irreversibly between them, and so it also produces the same changes in entropy.
Solution
We now calculate the two changes in entropy using . First, for the heat transfer from the hot
reservoir,
15.50
And for the cold reservoir,
15.51
Thus the total is
15.52
Discussion
There is anincreasein entropy for the system of two heat reservoirs undergoing this irreversible heat transfer. We
will see that this means there is a loss of ability to do work with this transferred energy. Entropy has increased, and
energy has become unavailable to do work.
PAGE: 674
656 15 • Thermodynamics
FIGURE15.33(a) Heat transfer from a hot object to a cold one is an irreversible process that produces an overall increase in entropy. (b)
The same final state and, thus, the same change in entropy is achieved for the objects if reversible heat transfer processes occur between
the two objects whose temperatures are the same as the temperatures of the corresponding objects in the irreversible process.
It is reasonable that entropy increases for heat transfer from hot to cold. Since the change in entropy is , there
is a larger change at lower temperatures. The decrease in entropy of the hot object is therefore less than the
increase in entropy of the cold object, producing an overall increase, just as in the previous example. This result is
very general:
There is an increase in entropy for any system undergoing an irreversible process.
With respect to entropy, there are only two possibilities: entropy is constant for a reversible process, and it increases
for an irreversible process. There is a fourth version ofthe second law of thermodynamics stated in terms of
entropy:
The total entropy of a system either increases or remains constant in any process; it never decreases.
For example, heat transfer cannot occur spontaneously from cold to hot, because entropy would decrease.
Entropy is very different from energy. Entropy isnotconserved but increases in all real processes. Reversible
processes (such as in Carnot engines) are the processes in which the most heat transfer to work takes place and are
also the ones that keep entropy constant. Thus we are led to make a connection between entropy and the
availability of energy to do work.
Entropy and the Unavailability of Energy to Do Work
What does a change in entropy mean, and why should we be interested in it? One reason is that entropy is directly
related to the fact that not all heat transfer can be converted into work. The next example gives some indication of
how an increase in entropy results in less heat transfer into work.
EXAMPLE 15.7
Less Work is Produced by a Given Heat Transfer When Entropy Change is Greater
(a) Calculate the work output of a Carnot engine operating between temperatures of 600 K and 100 K for 4000 J of
heat transfer to the engine. (b) Now suppose that the 4000 J of heat transfer occurs first from the 600 K reservoir to
a 250 K reservoir (without doing any work, and this produces the increase in entropy calculated above) before
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 675
15.6 • Entropy and the Second Law of Thermodynamics: Disorder and the Unavailability of Energy 657
transferring into a Carnot engine operating between 250 K and 100 K. What work output is produced? (SeeFigure
15.34.)
Strategy
In both parts, we must first calculate the Carnot efficiency and then the work output.
Solution (a)
The Carnot efficiency is given by
15.53
Substituting the given temperatures yields
15.54
Now the work output can be calculated using the definition of efficiency for any heat engine as given by
15.55
Solving for and substituting known terms gives
15.56
Solution (b)
Similarly,
15.57
′
so that
15.58
Discussion
There is 933 J less work from the same heat transfer in the second process. This result is important. The same heat
transfer into two perfect engines produces different work outputs, because the entropy change differs in the two
cases. In the second case, entropy is greater and less work is produced. Entropy is associated with theunavailability
of energy to do work.
PAGE: 676
658 15 • Thermodynamics
FIGURE15.34(a) A Carnot engine working at between 600 K and 100 K has 4000 J of heat transfer and performs 3333 J of work. (b) The
4000 J of heat transfer occurs first irreversibly to a 250 K reservoir and then goes into a Carnot engine. The increase in entropy caused by
the heat transfer to a colder reservoir results in a smaller work output of 2400 J. There is a permanent loss of 933 J of energy for the
purpose of doing work.
When entropy increases, a certain amount of energy becomespermanentlyunavailable to do work. The energy is
not lost, but its character is changed, so that some of it can never be converted to doing work—that is, to an
organized force acting through a distance. For instance, in the previous example, 933 J less work was done after an
increase in entropy of 9.33 J/K occurred in the 4000 J heat transfer from the 600 K reservoir to the 250 K reservoir.
It can be shown that the amount of energy that becomes unavailable for work is
15.59
where is the lowest temperature utilized. In the previous example,
15.60
as found.
Heat Death of the Universe: An Overdose of Entropy
In the early, energetic universe, all matter and energy were easily interchangeable and identical in nature. Gravity
played a vital role in the young universe. Although it may haveseemeddisorderly, and therefore, superficially
entropic, in fact, there was enormous potential energy available to do work—all the future energy in the universe.
As the universe matured, temperature differences arose, which created more opportunity for work. Stars are hotter
than planets, for example, which are warmer than icy asteroids, which are warmer still than the vacuum of the space
between them.
Most of these are cooling down from their usually violent births, at which time they were provided with energy of
their own—nuclear energy in the case of stars, volcanic energy on Earth and other planets, and so on. Without
additional energy input, however, their days are numbered.
As entropy increases, less and less energy in the universe is available to do work. On Earth, we still have great stores
of energy such as fossil and nuclear fuels; large-scale temperature differences, which can provide wind energy;
geothermal energies due to differences in temperature in Earth’s layers; and tidal energies owing to our abundance
of liquid water. As these are used, a certain fraction of the energy they contain can never be converted into doing
work. Eventually, all fuels will be exhausted, all temperatures will equalize, and it will be impossible for heat engines
to function, or for work to be done.
Entropy increases in a closed system, such as the universe. But in parts of the universe, for instance, in the Solar
system, it is not a locally closed system. Energy flows from the Sun to the planets, replenishing Earth’s stores of
energy. The Sun will continue to supply us with energy for about another five billion years. We will enjoy direct solar
energy, as well as side effects of solar energy, such as wind power and biomass energy from photosynthetic plants.
The energy from the Sun will keep our water at the liquid state, and the Moon’s gravitational pull will continue to
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 677
15.6 • Entropy and the Second Law of Thermodynamics: Disorder and the Unavailability of Energy 659
provide tidal energy. But Earth’s geothermal energy will slowly run down and won’t be replenished.
But in terms of the universe, and the very long-term, very large-scale picture, the entropy of the universe is
increasing, and so the availability of energy to do work is constantly decreasing. Eventually, when all stars have died,
all forms of potential energy have been utilized, and all temperatures have equalized (depending on the mass of the
universe, either at a very high temperature following a universal contraction, or a very low one, just before all activity
ceases) there will be no possibility of doing work.
Either way, the universe is destined for thermodynamic equilibrium—maximum entropy. This is often called theheat
death of the universe, and will mean the end of all activity. However, whether the universe contracts and heats up, or
continues to expand and cools down, the end is not near. Calculations of black holes suggest that entropy can easily
continue for at least years.
Order to Disorder
Entropy is related not only to the unavailability of energy to do work—it is also a measure of disorder. This notion was
initially postulated by Ludwig Boltzmann in the 1800s. For example, melting a block of ice means taking a highly
structured and orderly system of water molecules and converting it into a disorderly liquid in which molecules have
no fixed positions. (SeeFigure 15.35.) There is a large increase in entropy in the process, as seen in the following
example.
EXAMPLE 15.8
Entropy Associated with Disorder
Find the increase in entropy of 1.00 kg of ice originally at that is melted to form water at .
Strategy
As before, the change in entropy can be calculated from the definition of once we find the energy needed to
melt the ice.
Solution
The change in entropy is defined as:
15.61
Here is the heat transfer necessary to melt 1.00 kg of ice and is given by
15.62
where is the mass and is the latent heat of fusion. for water, so that
15.63
Now the change in entropy is positive, since heat transfer occurs into the ice to cause the phase change; thus,
15.64
is the melting temperature of ice. That is, . So the change in entropy is
×
15.65
×
Discussion
This is a significant increase in entropy accompanying an increase in disorder.
PAGE: 678
660 15 • Thermodynamics
FIGURE15.35When ice melts, it becomes more disordered and less structured. The systematic arrangement of molecules in a crystal
structure is replaced by a more random and less orderly movement of molecules without fixed locations or orientations. Its entropy
increases because heat transfer occurs into it. Entropy is a measure of disorder.
In another easily imagined example, suppose we mix equal masses of water originally at two different
temperatures, say and . The result is water at an intermediate temperature of . Three
outcomes have resulted: entropy has increased, some energy has become unavailable to do work, and the system
has become less orderly. Let us think about each of these results.
First, entropy has increased for the same reason that it did in the example above. Mixing the two bodies of water has
the same effect as heat transfer from the hot one and the same heat transfer into the cold one. The mixing
decreases the entropy of the hot water but increases the entropy of the cold water by a greater amount, producing
an overall increase in entropy.
Second, once the two masses of water are mixed, there is only one temperature—you cannot run a heat engine with
them. The energy that could have been used to run a heat engine is now unavailable to do work.
Third, the mixture is less orderly, or to use another term, less structured. Rather than having two masses at different
temperatures and with different distributions of molecular speeds, we now have a single mass with a uniform
temperature.
These three results—entropy, unavailability of energy, and disorder—are not only related but are in fact essentially
equivalent.
Life, Evolution, and the Second Law of Thermodynamics
Some people misunderstand the second law of thermodynamics, stated in terms of entropy, to say that the process
of the evolution of life violates this law. Over time, complex organisms evolved from much simpler ancestors,
representing a large decrease in entropy of the Earth’s biosphere. It is a fact that living organisms have evolved to be
highly structured, and much lower in entropy than the substances from which they grow. But it isalwayspossible for
the entropy of one part of the universe to decrease, provided the total change in entropy of the universe increases.
In equation form, we can write this as
15.66
Thus can be negative as long as is positive and greater in magnitude.
How is it possible for a system to decrease its entropy? Energy transfer is necessary. If I pick up marbles that are
scattered about the room and put them into a cup, my work has decreased the entropy of that system. If I gather
iron ore from the ground and convert it into steel and build a bridge, my work has decreased the entropy of that
system. Energy coming from the Sun can decrease the entropy of local systems on Earth—that is, is negative.
But the overall entropy of the rest of the universe increases by a greater amount—that is, is positive and
greater in magnitude. Thus, , and the second law of thermodynamics isnotviolated.
Every time a plant stores some solar energy in the form of chemical potential energy, or an updraft of warm air lifts a
soaring bird, the Earth can be viewed as a heat engine operating between a hot reservoir supplied by the Sun and a
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 679
15.7 • Statistical Interpretation of Entropy and the Second Law of Thermodynamics: The Underlying Explanation 661
cold reservoir supplied by dark outer space—a heat engine of high complexity, causing local decreases in entropy as
it uses part of the heat transfer from the Sun into deep space. There is a large total increase in entropy resulting
from this massive heat transfer. A small part of this heat transfer is stored in structured systems on Earth, producing
much smaller local decreases in entropy. (SeeFigure 15.36.)
FIGURE15.36Earth’s entropy may decrease in the process of intercepting a small part of the heat transfer from the Sun into deep space.
Entropy for the entire process increases greatly while Earth becomes more structured with living systems and stored energy in various
forms.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Reversible Reactions
Watch a reaction proceed over time. How does total energy affect a reaction rate? Vary temperature, barrier height,
and potential energies. Record concentrations and time in order to extract rate coefficients. Do temperature
dependent studies to extract Arrhenius parameters. This simulation is best used with teacher guidance because it
presents an analogy of chemical reactions.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/l/21reversereact).
15.7 Statistical Interpretation of Entropy and the Second Law of
Thermodynamics: The Underlying Explanation
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Identify probabilities in entropy.
• Analyze statistical probabilities in entropic systems.
FIGURE15.37When you toss a coin a large number of times, heads and tails tend to come up in roughly equal numbers. Why doesn’t
heads come up 100, 90, or even 80% of the time? (credit: Jon Sullivan, PDPhoto.org)
The various ways of formulating the second law of thermodynamics tell what happens rather than why it happens.
PAGE: 680
662 15 • Thermodynamics
Why should heat transfer occur only from hot to cold? Why should energy become ever less available to do work?
Why should the universe become increasingly disorderly? The answer is that it is a matter of overwhelming
probability. Disorder is simply vastly more likely than order.
When you watch an emerging rain storm begin to wet the ground, you will notice that the drops fall in a disorganized
manner both in time and in space. Some fall close together, some far apart, but they never fall in straight, orderly
rows. It is not impossible for rain to fall in an orderly pattern, just highly unlikely, because there are many more
disorderly ways than orderly ones. To illustrate this fact, we will examine some random processes, starting with coin
tosses.
Coin Tosses
What are the possible outcomes of tossing 5 coins? Each coin can land either heads or tails. On the large scale, we
are concerned only with the total heads and tails and not with the order in which heads and tails appear. The
following possibilities exist:
15.67
These are what we call macrostates. Amacrostateis an overall property of a system. It does not specify the details
of the system, such as the order in which heads and tails occur or which coins are heads or tails.
Using this nomenclature, a system of 5 coins has the 6 possible macrostates just listed. Some macrostates are more
likely to occur than others. For instance, there is only one way to get 5 heads, but there are several ways to get 3
heads and 2 tails, making the latter macrostate more probable.Table 15.3lists of all the ways in which 5 coins can
be tossed, taking into account the order in which heads and tails occur. Each sequence is called amicrostate—a
detailed description of every element of a system.
Number of
Individual microstates
microstates
5 heads, 0
HHHHH 1
tails
4 heads, 1
HHHHT, HHHTH, HHTHH, HTHHH, THHHH 5
tail
3 heads, 2 HTHTH, THTHH, HTHHT, THHTH, THHHT HTHTH, THTHH, HTHHT,
10
tails THHTH, THHHT
2 heads, 3 TTTHH, TTHHT, THHTT, HHTTT, TTHTH, THTHT, HTHTT, THTTH, HTTHT,
10
tails HTTTH
1 head, 4
TTTTH, TTTHT, TTHTT, THTTT, HTTTT 5
tails
TABLE15.35-Coin Toss
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 681
15.7 • Statistical Interpretation of Entropy and the Second Law of Thermodynamics: The Underlying Explanation 663
Number of
Individual microstates
microstates
0 heads, 5
TTTTT 1
tails
Total: 32
TABLE15.35-Coin Toss
The macrostate of 3 heads and 2 tails can be achieved in 10 ways and is thus 10 times more probable than the one
having 5 heads. Not surprisingly, it is equally probable to have the reverse, 2 heads and 3 tails. Similarly, it is equally
probable to get 5 tails as it is to get 5 heads. Note that all of these conclusions are based on the crucial assumption
that each microstate is equally probable. With coin tosses, this requires that the coins not be asymmetric in a way
that favors one side over the other, as with loaded dice. With any system, the assumption that all microstates are
equally probable must be valid, or the analysis will be erroneous.
The two most orderly possibilities are 5 heads or 5 tails. (They are more structured than the others.) They are also
the least likely, only 2 out of 32 possibilities. The most disorderly possibilities are 3 heads and 2 tails and its reverse.
(They are the least structured.) The most disorderly possibilities are also the most likely, with 20 out of 32
possibilities for the 3 heads and 2 tails and its reverse. If we start with an orderly array like 5 heads and toss the
coins, it is very likely that we will get a less orderly array as a result, since 30 out of the 32 possibilities are less
orderly. So even if you start with an orderly state, there is a strong tendency to go from order to disorder, from low
entropy to high entropy. The reverse can happen, but it is unlikely.
Macrostate Number of microstates
Heads Tails (W)
100 0 1
99 1 ×
95 5 ×
90 10 ×
75 25 ×
60 40 ×
55 45 ×
51 49 ×
50 50 ×
TABLE15.4100-Coin Toss
PAGE: 682
664 15 • Thermodynamics
Macrostate Number of microstates
49 51 ×
45 55 ×
40 60 ×
25 75 ×
10 90 ×
5 95 ×
1 99 ×
0 100 1
Total: ×
TABLE15.4100-Coin Toss
This result becomes dramatic for larger systems. Consider what happens if you have 100 coins instead of just 5. The
most orderly arrangements (most structured) are 100 heads or 100 tails. The least orderly (least structured) is that
of 50 heads and 50 tails. There is only 1 way (1 microstate) to get the most orderly arrangement of 100 heads.
There are 100 ways (100 microstates) to get the next most orderly arrangement of 99 heads and 1 tail (also 100 to
get its reverse). And there are ways to get 50 heads and 50 tails, the least orderly arrangement.Table
15.4is an abbreviated list of the various macrostates and the number of microstates for each macrostate. The total
number of microstates—the total number of different ways 100 coins can be tossed—is an impressively large
. Now, if we start with an orderly macrostate like 100 heads and toss the coins, there is a virtual
certainty that we will get a less orderly macrostate. If we keep tossing the coins, it is possible, but exceedingly
unlikely, that we will ever get back to the most orderly macrostate. If you tossed the coins once each second, you
could expect to get either 100 heads or 100 tails once in years! This period is 1 trillion ( ) times longer
than the age of the universe, and so the chances are essentially zero. In contrast, there is an 8% chance of getting
50 heads, a 73% chance of getting from 45 to 55 heads, and a 96% chance of getting from 40 to 60 heads. Disorder
is highly likely.
Disorder in a Gas
The fantastic growth in the odds favoring disorder that we see in going from 5 to 100 coins continues as the number
of entities in the system increases. Let us now imagine applying this approach to perhaps a small sample of gas.
Because counting microstates and macrostates involves statistics, this is calledstatistical analysis. The
macrostates of a gas correspond to its macroscopic properties, such as volume, temperature, and pressure; and its
microstates correspond to the detailed description of the positions and velocities of its atoms. Even a small amount
of gas has a huge number of atoms: of an ideal gas at 1.0 atm and has atoms. So each
macrostate has an immense number of microstates. In plain language, this means that there are an immense
number of ways in which the atoms in a gas can be arranged, while still having the same pressure, temperature, and
so on.
The most likely conditions (or macrostates) for a gas are those we see all the time—a random distribution of atoms
in space with a Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution of speeds in random directions, as predicted by kinetic theory. This
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 683
15.7 • Statistical Interpretation of Entropy and the Second Law of Thermodynamics: The Underlying Explanation 665
is the most disorderly and least structured condition we can imagine. In contrast, one type of very orderly and
structured macrostate has all of the atoms in one corner of a container with identical velocities. There are very few
ways to accomplish this (very few microstates corresponding to it), and so it is exceedingly unlikely ever to occur.
(SeeFigure 15.38(b).) Indeed, it is so unlikely that we have a law saying that it is impossible, which has never been
observed to be violated—the second law of thermodynamics.
FIGURE15.38(a) The ordinary state of gas in a container is a disorderly, random distribution of atoms or molecules with a Maxwell-
Boltzmann distribution of speeds. It is so unlikely that these atoms or molecules would ever end up in one corner of the container that it
might as well be impossible. (b) With energy transfer, the gas can be forced into one corner and its entropy greatly reduced. But left alone, it
will spontaneously increase its entropy and return to the normal conditions, because they are immensely more likely.
The disordered condition is one of high entropy, and the ordered one has low entropy. With a transfer of energy from
another system, we could force all of the atoms into one corner and have a local decrease in entropy, but at the cost
of an overall increase in entropy of the universe. If the atoms start out in one corner, they will quickly disperse and
become uniformly distributed and will never return to the orderly original state (Figure 15.38(b)). Entropy will
increase. With such a large sample of atoms, it is possible—but unimaginably unlikely—for entropy to decrease.
Disorder is vastly more likely than order.
The arguments that disorder and high entropy are the most probable states are quite convincing. The great Austrian
physicist Ludwig Boltzmann (1844–1906)—who, along with Maxwell, made so many contributions to kinetic
theory—proved that the entropy of a system in a given state (a macrostate) can be written as
15.68
where is Boltzmann’s constant, and is the natural logarithm of the number of
microstates corresponding to the given macrostate. is proportional to the probability that the macrostate will
occur. Thus entropy is directly related to the probability of a state—the more likely the state, the greater its entropy.
Boltzmann proved that this expression for is equivalent to the definition , which we have used
extensively.
Thus the second law of thermodynamics is explained on a very basic level: entropy either remains the same or
increases in every process. This phenomenon is due to the extraordinarily small probability of a decrease, based on
the extraordinarily larger number of microstates in systems with greater entropy. Entropycandecrease, but for any
macroscopic system, this outcome is so unlikely that it will never be observed.
PAGE: 684
666 15 • Thermodynamics
EXAMPLE 15.9
Entropy Increases in a Coin Toss
Suppose you toss 100 coins starting with 60 heads and 40 tails, and you get the most likely result, 50 heads and 50
tails. What is the change in entropy?
Strategy
Noting that the number of microstates is labeled inTable 15.4for the 100-coin toss, we can use
to calculate the change in entropy.
Solution
The change in entropy is
15.69
where the subscript i stands for the initial 60 heads and 40 tails state, and the subscript f for the final 50 heads and
50 tails state. Substituting the values for fromTable 15.4gives
15.70
Discussion
This increase in entropy means we have moved to a less orderly situation. It is not impossible for further tosses to
produce the initial state of 60 heads and 40 tails, but it is less likely. There is about a 1 in 90 chance for that
decrease in entropy ( ) to occur. If we calculate the decrease in entropy to move to the most
orderly state, we get . There is about a chance of this change occurring. So while
very small decreases in entropy are unlikely, slightly greater decreases are impossibly unlikely. These probabilities
imply, again, that for a macroscopic system, a decrease in entropy is impossible. For example, for heat transfer to
occur spontaneously from 1.00 kg of ice to its environment, there would be a decrease in entropy of
. Given that a corresponds to about a chance, a decrease of this size
( ) is anutterimpossibility. Even for a milligram of melted ice to spontaneously refreeze is impossible.
Problem-Solving Strategies for Entropy
1. Examine the situation to determine if entropy is involved.
2. Identify the system of interest and draw a labeled diagram of the system showing energy flow.
3. Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem (identify the unknowns).A written list is
useful.
4. Make a list of what is given or can be inferred from the problem as stated (identify the knowns).You must
carefully identify the heat transfer, if any, and the temperature at which the process takes place. It is also
important to identify the initial and final states.
5. Solve the appropriate equation for the quantity to be determined (the unknown).Note that the change in
entropy can be determined between any states by calculating it for a reversible process.
6. Substitute the known value along with their units into the appropriate equation, and obtain numerical
solutions complete with units.
7. To see if it is reasonable: Does it make sense?For example, total entropy should increase for any real
process or be constant for a reversible process. Disordered states should be more probable and have
greater entropy than ordered states.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 685
15 • Glossary 667
Glossary
adiabatic process a process in which no heat transfer transfer, work, and stored fat
takes place internal energy the sum of the kinetic and potential
Carnot cycle a cyclical process that uses only energies of a system’s atoms and molecules
reversible processes, the adiabatic and isothermal irreversible process any process that depends on
processes path direction
Carnot efficiency the maximum theoretical efficiency isobaric process constant-pressure process in which
for a heat engine a gas does work
Carnot engine a heat engine that uses a Carnot cycle isochoric process a constant-volume process
change in entropy the ratio of heat transfer to isothermal process a constant-temperature process
temperature macrostate an overall property of a system
coefficient of performance for a heat pump, it is the microstate each sequence within a larger macrostate
ratio of heat transfer at the output (the hot Otto cycle a thermodynamic cycle, consisting of a
reservoir) to the work supplied; for a refrigerator or pair of adiabatic processes and a pair of isochoric
air conditioner, it is the ratio of heat transfer from processes, that converts heat into work, e.g., the
the cold reservoir to the work supplied four-stroke engine cycle of intake, compression,
cyclical process a process in which the path returns ignition, and exhaust
to its original state at the end of every cycle reversible process a process in which both the heat
entropy a measurement of a system's disorder and engine system and the external environment
its inability to do work in a system theoretically can be returned to their original states
first law of thermodynamics states that the change second law of thermodynamics heat transfer flows
in internal energy of a system equals the net heat from a hotter to a cooler object, never the reverse,
transferintothe system minus the net work doneby and some heat energy in any process is lost to
the system available work in a cyclical process
heat engine a machine that uses heat transfer to do second law of thermodynamics stated in terms of
work entropy the total entropy of a system either
heat pump a machine that generates heat transfer increases or remains constant; it never decreases
from cold to hot statistical analysis using statistics to examine data,
human metabolism conversion of food into heat such as counting microstates and macrostates
Section Summary
15.1The First Law of Thermodynamics thermodynamics is that machines can be
harnessed to do work that humans previously did
• The first law of thermodynamics is given as
by hand or by external energy supplies such as
, where is the change in
running water or the heat of the Sun. A machine
internal energy of a system, is the net heat
that uses heat transfer to do work is known as a
transfer (the sum of all heat transfer into and out
heat engine.
of the system), and is the net work done (the
• There are several simple processes, used by heat
sum of all work done on or by the system).
engines, that flow from the first law of
• Both and are energy in transit; only
thermodynamics. Among them are the isobaric,
represents an independent quantity capable of
isochoric, isothermal and adiabatic processes.
being stored.
• These processes differ from one another based on
• The internal energy of a system depends only on
how they affect pressure, volume, temperature,
the state of the system and not how it reached that
and heat transfer.
state.
• If the work done is performed on the outside
• Metabolism of living organisms, and
environment, work ( ) will be a positive value. If
photosynthesis of plants, are specialized types of
the work done is done to the heat engine system,
heat transfer, doing work, and internal energy of
work ( ) will be a negative value.
systems.
• Some thermodynamic processes, including
15.2The First Law of Thermodynamics and isothermal and adiabatic processes, are reversible
Some Simple Processes in theory; that is, both the thermodynamic system
and the environment can be returned to their
• One of the important implications of the first law of
initial states. However, because of loss of energy
PAGE: 686
668 15 • Section Summary
owing to the second law of thermodynamics, may be possible at absolute zero, but this has
complete reversibility does not work in practice. never been seen in nature.
15.3Introduction to the Second Law of 15.5Applications of Thermodynamics: Heat
Thermodynamics: Heat Engines and Their Pumps and Refrigerators
Efficiency
• An artifact of the second law of thermodynamics is
• The two expressions of the second law of the ability to heat an interior space using a heat
thermodynamics are: (i) Heat transfer occurs pump. Heat pumps compress cold ambient air
spontaneously from higher- to lower-temperature and, in so doing, heat it to room temperature
bodies but never spontaneously in the reverse without violation of conservation principles.
direction; and (ii) It is impossible in any system for • To calculate the heat pump’s coefficient of
heat transfer from a reservoir to completely performance, use the equation .
convert to work in a cyclical process in which the
• A refrigerator is a heat pump; it takes warm
system returns to its initial state.
ambient air and expands it to chill it.
• Irreversible processes depend on path and do not
return to their original state. Cyclical processes are 15.6Entropy and the Second Law of
processes that return to their original state at the Thermodynamics: Disorder and the
end of every cycle. Unavailability of Energy
• In a cyclical process, such as a heat engine, the
• Entropy is the loss of energy available to do work.
net work done by the system equals the net heat
• Another form of the second law of
transfer into the system, or , where
thermodynamics states that the total entropy of a
is the heat transfer from the hot object (hot
system either increases or remains constant; it
reservoir), and is the heat transfer into the cold
never decreases.
object (cold reservoir).
• Entropy is zero in a reversible process; it increases
• Efficiency can be expressed as , the
in an irreversible process.
ratio of work output divided by the amount of • The ultimate fate of the universe is likely to be
energy input. thermodynamic equilibrium, where the universal
• The four-stroke gasoline engine is often explained temperature is constant and no energy is available
in terms of the Otto cycle, which is a repeating to do work.
sequence of processes that convert heat into • Entropy is also associated with the tendency
work. toward disorder in a closed system.
15.4Carnot’s Perfect Heat Engine: The 15.7Statistical Interpretation of Entropy
Second Law of Thermodynamics Restated and the Second Law of Thermodynamics:
The Underlying Explanation
• The Carnot cycle is a theoretical cycle that is the
most efficient cyclical process possible. Any • Disorder is far more likely than order, which can be
engine using the Carnot cycle, which uses only seen statistically.
reversible processes (adiabatic and isothermal), is • The entropy of a system in a given state (a
known as a Carnot engine. macrostate) can be written as
• Any engine that uses the Carnot cycle enjoys the
maximum theoretical efficiency. where is Boltzmann’s
• While Carnot engines are ideal engines, in reality, constant, and is the natural logarithm of the
no engine achieves Carnot’s theoretical maximum number of microstates corresponding to the
efficiency, since dissipative processes, such as given macrostate.
friction, play a role. Carnot cycles without heat loss
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 687
15 • Conceptual Questions 669
Conceptual Questions
15.1The First Law of Thermodynamics 9. One method of converting heat transfer into doing
work is for heat transfer into a gas to take place,
1. Describe the photo of the tea kettle at the beginning
which expands, doing work on a piston, as shown in
of this section in terms of heat transfer, work done,
the figure below. (a) Is the heat transfer converted
and internal energy. How is heat being transferred?
directly to work in an isobaric process, or does it go
What is the work done and what is doing it? How
through another form first? Explain your answer. (b)
does the kettle maintain its internal energy?
What about in an isothermal process? (c) What
2. The first law of thermodynamics and the
about in an adiabatic process (where heat transfer
conservation of energy, as discussed in
occurred prior to the adiabatic process)?
Conservation of Energy, are clearly related. How do
they differ in the types of energy considered?
3. Heat transfer and work done are always
energy in transit, whereas internal energy is
energy stored in a system. Give an example of each
type of energy, and state specifically how it is either
in transit or resides in a system.
4. How do heat transfer and internal energy differ? In
particular, which can be stored as such in a system
and which cannot?
5. If you run down some stairs and stop, what
happens to your kinetic energy and your initial
gravitational potential energy?
6. Give an explanation of how food energy (calories)
can be viewed as molecular potential energy
(consistent with the atomic and molecular
definition of internal energy).
7. Identify the type of energy transferred to your body
in each of the following as either internal energy,
heat transfer, or doing work: (a) basking in sunlight;
(b) eating food; (c) riding an elevator to a higher
floor.
15.2The First Law of Thermodynamics and
Some Simple Processes
8. A great deal of effort, time, and money has been
spent in the quest for the so-called perpetual-
motion machine, which is defined as a hypothetical
machine that operates or produces useful work
indefinitely and/or a hypothetical machine that
FIGURE15.39
produces more work or energy than it consumes.
Explain, in terms of heat engines and the first law of 10. Would the previous question make any sense for
thermodynamics, why or why not such a machine is an isochoric process? Explain your answer.
likely to be constructed. 11. We ordinarily say that for an isothermal
process. Does this assume no phase change takes
place? Explain your answer.
12. The temperature of a rapidly expanding gas
decreases. Explain why in terms of the first law of
thermodynamics. (Hint: Consider whether the gas
does work and whether heat transfer occurs
rapidly into the gas through conduction.)
PAGE: 688
670 15 • Conceptual Questions
13. Which cyclical process represented by the two 19. Why—other than the fact that the second law of
closed loops, ABCFA and ABDEA, on the thermodynamics says reversible engines are the
diagram in the figure below produces the greatest most efficient—should heat engines employing
network? Is that process also the one with the reversible processes be more efficient than those
smallest work input required to return it to point employing irreversible processes? Consider that
A? Explain your responses. dissipative mechanisms are one cause of
irreversibility.
15.4Carnot’s Perfect Heat Engine: The
Second Law of Thermodynamics Restated
20. Think about the drinking bird at the beginning of
this section (Figure 15.20). Although the bird
enjoys the theoretical maximum efficiency
possible, if left to its own devices over time, the
bird will cease “drinking.” What are some of the
dissipative processes that might cause the bird’s
motion to cease?
21. Can improved engineering and materials be
employed in heat engines to reduce heat transfer
FIGURE15.40The two cyclical processes shown on this
diagram start with and return the system to the conditions at into the environment? Can they eliminate heat
point A, but they follow different paths and produce different
transfer into the environment entirely?
amounts of work.
22. Does the second law of thermodynamics alter the
14. A real process may be nearly adiabatic if it occurs
conservation of energy principle?
over a very short time. How does the short time
span help the process to be adiabatic?
15.5Applications of Thermodynamics: Heat
15. It is unlikely that a process can be isothermal
Pumps and Refrigerators
unless it is a very slow process. Explain why. Is the
same true for isobaric and isochoric processes? 23. Explain why heat pumps do not work as well in
Explain your answer. very cold climates as they do in milder ones. Is the
same true of refrigerators?
15.3Introduction to the Second Law of 24. In some Northern European nations, homes are
Thermodynamics: Heat Engines and Their being built without heating systems of any type.
Efficiency They are very well insulated and are kept warm by
the body heat of the residents. However, when the
16. Imagine you are driving a car up Pike’s Peak in residents are not at home, it is still warm in these
Colorado. To raise a car weighing 1000 kilograms houses. What is a possible explanation?
a distance of 100 meters would require about a 25. Why do refrigerators, air conditioners, and heat
million joules. You could raise a car 12.5 pumps operate most cost-effectively for cycles
kilometers with the energy in a gallon of gas. with a small difference between and ? (Note
Driving up Pike's Peak (a mere 3000-meter climb) that the temperatures of the cycle employed are
should consume a little less than a quart of gas. crucial to its .)
But other considerations have to be taken into 26. Grocery store managers contend that there isless
account. Explain, in terms of efficiency, what total energy consumption in the summer if the
factors may keep you from realizing your ideal store is kept at alowtemperature. Make
energy use on this trip. arguments to support or refute this claim, taking
17. Is a temperature difference necessary to operate into account that there are numerous refrigerators
a heat engine? State why or why not. and freezers in the store.
18. Definitions of efficiency vary depending on how 27. Can you cool a kitchen by leaving the refrigerator
energy is being converted. Compare the door open?
definitions of efficiency for the human body and
heat engines. How does the definition of efficiency
in each relate to the type of energy being
converted into doing work?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 689
15 • Problems & Exercises 671
15.6Entropy and the Second Law of 33. Give an example of a spontaneous process in
Thermodynamics: Disorder and the which a system becomes less ordered and energy
Unavailability of Energy becomes less available to do work. What happens
to the system’s entropy in this process?
28. A woman shuts her summer cottage up in
34. What is the change in entropy in an adiabatic
September and returns in June. No one has
process? Does this imply that adiabatic processes
entered the cottage in the meantime. Explain what
are reversible? Can a process be precisely
she is likely to find, in terms of the second law of
adiabatic for a macroscopic system?
thermodynamics.
35. Does the entropy of a star increase or decrease as
29. Consider a system with a certain energy content,
it radiates? Does the entropy of the space into
from which we wish to extract as much work as
which it radiates (which has a temperature of
possible. Should the system’s entropy be high or
about 3 K) increase or decrease? What does this
low? Is this orderly or disorderly? Structured or
do to the entropy of the universe?
uniform? Explain briefly.
36. Explain why a building made of bricks has smaller
30. Does a gas become more orderly when it
entropy than the same bricks in a disorganized
liquefies? Does its entropy change? If so, does the
pile. Do this by considering the number of ways
entropy increase or decrease? Explain your
that each could be formed (the number of
answer.
microstates in each macrostate).
31. Explain how water’s entropy can decrease when it
freezes without violating the second law of
15.7Statistical Interpretation of Entropy
thermodynamics. Specifically, explain what
and the Second Law of Thermodynamics:
happens to the entropy of its surroundings.
The Underlying Explanation
32. Is a uniform-temperature gas more or less orderly
than one with several different temperatures? 37. Explain why a building made of bricks has smaller
Which is more structured? In which can heat entropy than the same bricks in a disorganized
transfer result in work done without heat transfer pile. Do this by considering the number of ways
from another system? that each could be formed (the number of
microstates in each macrostate).
Problems & Exercises
15.1The First Law of Thermodynamics 5. Suppose a woman does 500 J of work and 9500 J
of heat transfer occurs into the environment in the
1. What is the change in internal energy of a car if you
process. (a) What is the decrease in her internal
put 12.0 gal of gasoline into its tank? The energy
energy, assuming no change in temperature or
content of gasoline is . All other
consumption of food? (That is, there is no other
factors, such as the car’s temperature, are
energy transfer.) (b) What is her efficiency?
constant.
6. (a) How much food energy will a man metabolize in
2. How much heat transfer occurs from a system, if its
the process of doing 35.0 kJ of work with an
internal energy decreased by 150 J while it was
efficiency of 5.00%? (b) How much heat transfer
doing 30.0 J of work?
occurs to the environment to keep his temperature
3. A system does × of work while constant? Explicitly show how you follow the steps
× of heat transfer occurs to the in the Problem-Solving Strategy for
thermodynamics found inProblem-Solving
environment. What is the change in internal energy
Strategies for Thermodynamics.
of the system assuming no other changes (such as
7. (a) What is the average metabolic rate in watts of a
in temperature or by the addition of fuel)?
man who metabolizes 10,500 kJ of food energy in
4. What is the change in internal energy of a system
one day? (b) What is the maximum amount of work
which does × of work while ×
in joules he can do without breaking down fat,
of heat transfer occurs into the system, and assuming a maximum efficiency of 20.0%? (c)
× of heat transfer occurs to the Compare his work output with the daily output of a
environment? 187-W (0.250-horsepower) motor.
PAGE: 690
672 15 • Problems & Exercises
8. (a) How long will the energy in a 1470-kJ (350-kcal) 14. Calculate the net work output of a heat engine
cup of yogurt last in a woman doing work at the rate following path ABCDA in the figure below.
of 150 W with an efficiency of 20.0% (such as in
leisurely climbing stairs)? (b) Does the time found in
part (a) imply that it is easy to consume more food
energy than you can reasonably expect to work off
with exercise?
9. (a) A woman climbing the Washington Monument
metabolizes of food energy. If her
efficiency is 18.0%, how much heat transfer occurs
to the environment to keep her temperature
constant? (b) Discuss the amount of heat transfer
found in (a). Is it consistent with the fact that you
quickly warm up when exercising?
15.2The First Law of Thermodynamics and
Some Simple Processes
FIGURE15.41
10. A car tire contains of nitrogen at a 15. What is the net work output of a heat engine that
gauge pressure of × (about 32 psi). follows path ABDA in the figure above, with a
straight line from B to D? Why is the work output
How much more internal energy does this gas
less than for path ABCDA? Explicitly show how you
have than the same volume has at zero gauge
follow the steps in theProblem-Solving Strategies
pressure (which is equivalent to normal
for Thermodynamics.
atmospheric pressure)? (Use for the
16. Unreasonable Results
internal energy of nitrogen, a diatomic gas.)
What is wrong with the claim that a cyclical heat
11. A helium-filled rigid ball has a gauge pressure of
engine does 4.00 kJ of work on an input of 24.0 kJ
0.200 atm and a volume of 10.0 L. How much
of heat transfer while 16.0 kJ of heat transfers to
greater is the internal energy of the helium in the
the environment?
ball than it would be at zero gauge pressure?
17. (a) A cyclical heat engine, operating between
12. Steam to drive an old-fashioned steam locomotive
temperatures of and produces
is supplied at a constant gauge pressure of
4.00 MJ of work on a heat transfer of 5.00 MJ into
× (about 250 psi) to a piston with a the engine. How much heat transfer occurs to the
0.200-m radius. (a) By calculating , find the environment? (b) What is unreasonable about the
work done by the steam when the piston moves engine? (c) Which premise is unreasonable?
0.800 m. Note that this is the net work output, 18. Construct Your Own Problem
since gauge pressure is used. (b) Now find the Consider a car’s gasoline engine. Construct a
amount of work by calculating the force exerted problem in which you calculate the maximum
times the distance traveled. Is the answer the efficiency this engine can have. Among the things
same as in part (a)? to consider are the effective hot and cold reservoir
13. A hand-driven tire pump has a piston with a temperatures. Compare your calculated efficiency
2.50-cm diameter and a maximum stroke of 30.0 with the actual efficiency of car engines.
cm. (a) How much work do you do in one stroke if 19. Construct Your Own Problem
the average gauge pressure is × Consider a car trip into the mountains. Construct a
problem in which you calculate the overall
(about 35 psi)? (b) What average force do you
efficiency of the car for the trip as a ratio of kinetic
exert on the piston, neglecting friction and
and potential energy gained to fuel consumed.
gravitational force?
Compare this efficiency to the thermodynamic
efficiency quoted for gasoline engines and discuss
why the thermodynamic efficiency is so much
greater. Among the factors to be considered are
the gain in altitude and speed, the mass of the car,
the distance traveled, and typical fuel economy.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 691
15 • Problems & Exercises 673
15.3Introduction to the Second Law of 27. This problem compares the energy output and
Thermodynamics: Heat Engines and Their heat transfer to the environment by two different
Efficiency types of nuclear power stations—one with the
normal efficiency of 34.0%, and another with an
20. A certain heat engine does 10.0 kJ of work and
improved efficiency of 40.0%. Suppose both have
8.50 kJ of heat transfer occurs to the environment
the same heat transfer into the engine in one day,
in a cyclical process. (a) What was the heat
× . (a) How much more electrical
transfer into this engine? (b) What was the
energy is produced by the more efficient power
engine’s efficiency?
station? (b) How much less heat transfer occurs to
21. With × of heat transfer into this engine,
the environment by the more efficient power
a given cyclical heat engine can do only
station? (One type of more efficient nuclear power
× of work. (a) What is the engine’s station, the gas-cooled reactor, has not been
efficiency? (b) How much heat transfer to the reliable enough to be economically feasible in
environment takes place? spite of its greater efficiency.)
22. (a) What is the work output of a cyclical heat
engine having a 22.0% efficiency and × 15.4Carnot’s Perfect Heat Engine: The
Second Law of Thermodynamics Restated
of heat transfer into the engine? (b) How much
heat transfer occurs to the environment? 28. A certain gasoline engine has an efficiency of
23. (a) What is the efficiency of a cyclical heat engine 30.0%. What would the hot reservoir temperature
in which 75.0 kJ of heat transfer occurs to the be for a Carnot engine having that efficiency, if it
environment for every 95.0 kJ of heat transfer into operates with a cold reservoir temperature of
the engine? (b) How much work does it produce ?
for 100 kJ of heat transfer into the engine? 29. A gas-cooled nuclear reactor operates between
24. The engine of a large ship does × of hot and cold reservoir temperatures of and
. (a) What is the maximum efficiency of a
work with an efficiency of 5.00%. (a) How much
heat engine operating between these
heat transfer occurs to the environment? (b) How
temperatures? (b) Find the ratio of this efficiency
many barrels of fuel are consumed, if each barrel
to the Carnot efficiency of a standard nuclear
produces × of heat transfer when
reactor (found inExample 15.4).
burned?
30. (a) What is the hot reservoir temperature of a
25. (a) How much heat transfer occurs to the
Carnot engine that has an efficiency of 42.0% and
environment by an electrical power station that
a cold reservoir temperature of ? (b) What
uses × of heat transfer into the engine must the hot reservoir temperature be for a real
with an efficiency of 42.0%? (b) What is the ratio heat engine that achieves 0.700 of the maximum
of heat transfer to the environment to work efficiency, but still has an efficiency of 42.0% (and
output? (c) How much work is done? a cold reservoir at )? (c) Does your answer
26. Assume that the turbines at a coal-powered imply practical limits to the efficiency of car
power plant were upgraded, resulting in an gasoline engines?
improvement in efficiency of 3.32%. Assume that 31. Steam locomotives have an efficiency of 17.0%
prior to the upgrade the power station had an and operate with a hot steam temperature of
efficiency of 36% and that the heat transfer into . (a) What would the cold reservoir
the engine in one day is still the same at temperature be if this were a Carnot engine? (b)
× . (a) How much more electrical What would the maximum efficiency of this steam
engine be if its cold reservoir temperature were
energy is produced due to the upgrade? (b) How
?
much less heat transfer occurs to the environment
due to the upgrade?
PAGE: 692
674 15 • Problems & Exercises
32. Practical steam engines utilize steam, 40. In a very mild winter climate, a heat pump has
which is later exhausted at . (a) What is the heat transfer from an environment at to
maximum efficiency that such a heat engine can one at . What is the best possible
have? (b) Since steam is still quite hot, a coefficient of performance for these
second steam engine is sometimes operated using temperatures? Explicitly show how you follow the
the exhaust of the first. What is the maximum steps in theProblem-Solving Strategies for
efficiency of the second engine if its exhaust has a Thermodynamics.
temperature of ? (c) What is the overall 41. (a) What is the best coefficient of performance for
efficiency of the two engines? (d) Show that this is a heat pump that has a hot reservoir temperature
the same efficiency as a single Carnot engine of and a cold reservoir temperature of
operating between and . Explicitly ? (b) How much heat transfer occurs into
show how you follow the steps in theProblem- the warm environment if of work
Solving Strategies for Thermodynamics. ( ) is put into it? (c) If the cost of this
33. A coal-fired electrical power station has an work input is , how does its cost
efficiency of 38%. The temperature of the steam compare with the direct heat transfer achieved by
leaving the boiler is . What percentage of burning natural gas at a cost of 85.0 cents per
the maximum efficiency does this station obtain? therm. (A therm is a common unit of energy for
(Assume the temperature of the environment is natural gas and equals .)
.) 42. (a) What is the best coefficient of performance for
34. Would you be willing to financially back an a refrigerator that cools an environment at
inventor who is marketing a device that she claims and has heat transfer to another
has 25 kJ of heat transfer at 600 K, has heat environment at ? (b) How much work in
transfer to the environment at 300 K, and does 12 joules must be done for a heat transfer of 4186 kJ
kJ of work? Explain your answer. from the cold environment? (c) What is the cost of
35. Unreasonable Results doing this if the work costs 10.0 cents per
(a) Suppose you want to design a steam engine (a kilowatt-hour)? (d) How many kJ
that has heat transfer to the environment at of heat transfer occurs into the warm
and has a Carnot efficiency of 0.800. What environment? (e) Discuss what type of refrigerator
temperature of hot steam must you use? (b) What might operate between these temperatures.
is unreasonable about the temperature? (c) Which 43. Suppose you want to operate an ideal refrigerator
premise is unreasonable? with a cold temperature of , and you
36. Unreasonable Results would like it to have a coefficient of performance
Calculate the cold reservoir temperature of a of 7.00. What is the hot reservoir temperature for
steam engine that uses hot steam at and such a refrigerator?
has a Carnot efficiency of 0.700. (b) What is 44. An ideal heat pump is being considered for use in
unreasonable about the temperature? (c) Which heating an environment with a temperature of
premise is unreasonable? . What is the cold reservoir temperature if
the pump is to have a coefficient of performance
15.5Applications of Thermodynamics: Heat of 12.0?
Pumps and Refrigerators 45. A 4-ton air conditioner removes ×
37. What is the coefficient of performance of an ideal (48,000 British thermal units) from a cold
heat pump that has heat transfer from a cold environment in 1.00 h. (a) What energy input in
temperature of to a hot temperature of joules is necessary to do this if the air conditioner
? has an energy efficiency rating ( ) of 12.0? (b)
38. Suppose you have an ideal refrigerator that cools What is the cost of doing this if the work costs
an environment at and has heat transfer 10.0 cents per × (one kilowatt-hour)?
to another environment at . What is its
(c) Discuss whether this cost seems realistic. Note
coefficient of performance?
that the energy efficiency rating ( ) of an air
39. What is the best coefficient of performance
conditioner or refrigerator is defined to be the
possible for a hypothetical refrigerator that could
number of British thermal units of heat transfer
make liquid nitrogen at and has heat
from a cold environment per hour divided by the
transfer to the environment at ?
watts of power input.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 693
15 • Problems & Exercises 675
46. Show that the coefficients of performance of 53. What is the decrease in entropy of 25.0 g of water
refrigerators and heat pumps are related by that condenses on a bathroom mirror at a
. temperature of , assuming no change in
Start with the definitions of the s and the temperature and given the latent heat of
conservation of energy relationship between , vaporization to be 2450 kJ/kg?
, and . 54. Find the increase in entropy of 1.00 kg of liquid
nitrogen that starts at its boiling temperature,
15.6Entropy and the Second Law of boils, and warms to at constant pressure.
Thermodynamics: Disorder and the 55. A large electrical power station generates 1000
Unavailability of Energy MW of electricity with an efficiency of 35.0%. (a)
Calculate the heat transfer to the power station,
47. (a) On a winter day, a certain house loses , in one day. (b) How much heat transfer
× of heat to the outside (about 500,000 occurs to the environment in one day? (c) If the
heat transfer in the cooling towers is from
Btu). What is the total change in entropy due to
water into the local air mass, which increases in
this heat transfer alone, assuming an average
temperature from to , what is the
indoor temperature of and an average
total increase in entropy due to this heat transfer?
outdoor temperature of ? (b) This large
(d) How much energy becomes unavailable to do
change in entropy implies a large amount of
work because of this increase in entropy,
energy has become unavailable to do work. Where
assuming an lowest temperature? (Part of
do we find more energy when such energy is lost
could be utilized to operate heat engines or for
to us?
48. On a hot summer day, × of heat transfer simply heating the surroundings, but it rarely is.)
56. (a) How much heat transfer occurs from 20.0 kg of
into a parked car takes place, increasing its
water placed in contact with 20.0 kg of
temperature from to . What is the
water, producing a final temperature of
increase in entropy of the car due to this heat
? (b) How much work could a Carnot
transfer alone?
engine do with this heat transfer, assuming it
49. A hot rock ejected from a volcano’s lava fountain
operates between two reservoirs at constant
cools from to , and its entropy
temperatures of and ? (c) What
decreases by 950 J/K. How much heat transfer
increase in entropy is produced by mixing 20.0 kg
occurs from the rock?
of water with 20.0 kg of water?
50. When × of heat transfer occurs into a (d) Calculate the amount of work made
meat pie initially at , its entropy increases unavailable by this mixing using a low temperature
by 480 J/K. What is its final temperature? of , and compare it with the work done by
51. The Sun radiates energy at the rate of the Carnot engine. Explicitly show how you follow
× from its surface into dark the steps in theProblem-Solving Strategies for
Entropy. (e) Discuss how everyday processes
empty space (a negligible fraction radiates onto
make increasingly more energy unavailable to do
Earth and the other planets). The effective
work, as implied by this problem.
temperature of deep space is . (a) What is
the increase in entropy in one day due to this heat
15.7Statistical Interpretation of Entropy
transfer? (b) How much work is made unavailable?
and the Second Law of Thermodynamics:
52. (a) In reaching equilibrium, how much heat
The Underlying Explanation
transfer occurs from 1.00 kg of water at
when it is placed in contact with 1.00 kg of
57. UsingTable 15.4, verify the contention that if you
water in reaching equilibrium? (b) What is
toss 100 coins each second, you can expect to get
the change in entropy due to this heat transfer? (c)
100 heads or 100 tails once in × years;
How much work is made unavailable, taking the
calculate the time to two-digit accuracy.
lowest temperature to be ? Explicitly show
58. What percent of the time will you get something in
how you follow the steps in theProblem-Solving
the range from 60 heads and 40 tails through 40
Strategies for Entropy.
heads and 60 tails when tossing 100 coins? The
total number of microstates in that range is
× . (ConsultTable 15.4.)
PAGE: 694
676 15 • Problems & Exercises
59. (a) If tossing 100 coins, how many ways
Macrostate Number of Microstates (W)
(microstates) are there to get the three most likely
macrostates of 49 heads and 51 tails, 50 heads
3 7 120
and 50 tails, and 51 heads and 49 tails? (b) What
percent of the total possibilities is this? (Consult
2 8 45
Table 15.4.)
60. (a) What is the change in entropy if you start with
1 9 10
100 coins in the 45 heads and 55 tails macrostate,
toss them, and get 51 heads and 49 tails? (b)
0 10 1
What if you get 75 heads and 25 tails? (c) How
much more likely is 51 heads and 49 tails than 75
Total: 1024
heads and 25 tails? (d) Does either outcome
violate the second law of thermodynamics?
61. (a) What is the change in entropy if you start with TABLE15.510-Coin Toss
10 coins in the 5 heads and 5 tails macrostate,
62. (a) If you toss 10 coins, what percent of the time
toss them, and get 2 heads and 8 tails? (b) How
will you get the three most likely macrostates (6
much more likely is 5 heads and 5 tails than 2
heads and 4 tails, 5 heads and 5 tails, 4 heads and
heads and 8 tails? (Take the ratio of the number of
6 tails)? (b) You can realistically toss 10 coins and
microstates to find out.) (c) If you were betting on
count the number of heads and tails about twice a
2 heads and 8 tails would you accept odds of 252
minute. At that rate, how long will it take on
to 45? Explain why or why not.
average to get either 10 heads and 0 tails or 0
heads and 10 tails?
Macrostate Number of Microstates (W)
63. (a) Construct a table showing the macrostates and
all of the individual microstates for tossing 6 coins.
Heads Tails
(UseTable 15.5as a guide.) (b) How many
macrostates are there? (c) What is the total
10 0 1
number of microstates? (d) What percent chance
is there of tossing 5 heads and 1 tail? (e) How
9 1 10
much more likely are you to toss 3 heads and 3
tails than 5 heads and 1 tail? (Take the ratio of the
8 2 45
number of microstates to find out.)
64. In an air conditioner, 12.65 MJ of heat transfer
7 3 120
occurs from a cold environment in 1.00 h. (a) What
mass of ice melting would involve the same heat
6 4 210
transfer? (b) How many hours of operation would
be equivalent to melting 900 kg of ice? (c) If ice
5 5 252
costs 20 cents per kg, do you think the air
conditioner could be operated more cheaply than
4 6 210
by simply using ice? Describe in detail how you
evaluate the relative costs.
TABLE15.510-Coin Toss
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 695
CHAPTER 16
Oscillatory Motion and Waves
FIGURE16.1There are at least four types of waves in this picture—only the water waves are evident. There are also sound waves, light
waves, and waves on the guitar strings. (credit: John Norton)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
16.1Hooke’s Law: Stress and Strain Revisited
16.2Period and Frequency in Oscillations
16.3Simple Harmonic Motion: A Special Periodic Motion
16.4The Simple Pendulum
16.5Energy and the Simple Harmonic Oscillator
16.6Uniform Circular Motion and Simple Harmonic Motion
16.7Damped Harmonic Motion
16.8Forced Oscillations and Resonance
16.9Waves
16.10Superposition and Interference
16.11Energy in Waves: Intensity
INTRODUCTION TO OSCILLATORY MOTION AND WAVES What do an ocean buoy, a child in a swing, the cone
inside a speaker, a guitar, atoms in a crystal, the motion of chest cavities, and the beating of hearts all have in
common? They alloscillate—-that is, they move back and forth between two points. Many systems oscillate, and
they have certain characteristics in common. All oscillations involve force and energy. You push a child in a swing to
get the motion started. The energy of atoms vibrating in a crystal can be increased with heat. You put energy into a
guitar string when you pluck it.
Some oscillations createwaves. A guitar creates sound waves. You can make water waves in a swimming pool by
slapping the water with your hand. You can no doubt think of other types of waves. Some, such as water waves, are
PAGE: 696
678 16 • Oscillatory Motion and Waves
visible. Some, such as sound waves, are not. Butevery wave is a disturbance that moves from its source and carries
energy. Other examples of waves include earthquakes and visible light. Even subatomic particles, such as electrons,
can behave like waves.
By studying oscillatory motion and waves, we shall find that a small number of underlying principles describe all of
them and that wave phenomena are more common than you have ever imagined. We begin by studying the type of
force that underlies the simplest oscillations and waves. We will then expand our exploration of oscillatory motion
and waves to include concepts such as simple harmonic motion, uniform circular motion, and damped harmonic
motion. Finally, we will explore what happens when two or more waves share the same space, in the phenomena
known as superposition and interference.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/16-introduction-to-oscillatory-motion-
and-waves)
16.1 Hooke’s Law: Stress and Strain Revisited
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain Newton’s third law of motion with respect to stress and deformation.
• Describe the restoration of force and displacement.
• Calculate the energy in Hooke’s Law of deformation, and the stored energy in a spring.
FIGURE16.2When displaced from its vertical equilibrium position, this plastic ruler oscillates back and forth because of the restoring force
opposing displacement. When the ruler is on the left, there is a force to the right, and vice versa.
Newton’s first law implies that an object oscillating back and forth is experiencing forces. Without force, the object
would move in a straight line at a constant speed rather than oscillate. Consider, for example, plucking a plastic ruler
to the left as shown inFigure 16.2. The deformation of the ruler creates a force in the opposite direction, known as a
restoring force. Once released, the restoring force causes the ruler to move back toward its stable equilibrium
position, where the net force on it is zero. However, by the time the ruler gets there, it gains momentum and
continues to move to the right, producing the opposite deformation. It is then forced to the left, back through
equilibrium, and the process is repeated until dissipative forces dampen the motion. These forces remove
mechanical energy from the system, gradually reducing the motion until the ruler comes to rest.
The simplest oscillations occur when the restoring force is directly proportional to displacement. When stress and
strain were covered inNewton’s Third Law of Motion, the name was given to this relationship between force and
displacement was Hooke’s law:
16.1
Here, is the restoring force, is the displacement from equilibrium ordeformation, and is a constant related to
the difficulty in deforming the system. The minus sign indicates the restoring force is in the direction opposite to the
displacement.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 697
16.1 • Hooke’s Law: Stress and Strain Revisited 679
FIGURE16.3(a) The plastic ruler has been released, and the restoring force is returning the ruler to its equilibrium position. (b) The net
force is zero at the equilibrium position, but the ruler has momentum and continues to move to the right. (c) The restoring force is in the
opposite direction. It stops the ruler and moves it back toward equilibrium again. (d) Now the ruler has momentum to the left. (e) In the
absence of damping (caused by frictional forces), the ruler reaches its original position. From there, the motion will repeat itself.
Theforce constant is related to the rigidity (or stiffness) of a system—the larger the force constant, the greater the
restoring force, and the stiffer the system. The units of are newtons per meter (N/m). For example, is directly
related to Young’s modulus when we stretch a string.Figure 16.4shows a graph of the absolute value of the
restoring force versus the displacement for a system that can be described by Hooke’s law—a simple spring in this
case. The slope of the graph equals the force constant in newtons per meter. A common physics laboratory
exercise is to measure restoring forces created by springs, determine if they follow Hooke’s law, and calculate their
force constants if they do.
FIGURE16.4(a) A graph of absolute value of the restoring force versus displacement is displayed. The fact that the graph is a straight line
means that the system obeys Hooke’s law. The slope of the graph is the force constant . (b) The data in the graph were generated by
measuring the displacement of a spring from equilibrium while supporting various weights. The restoring force equals the weight
supported, if the mass is stationary.
PAGE: 698
680 16 • Oscillatory Motion and Waves
EXAMPLE 16.1
How Stiff Are Car Springs?
FIGURE16.5The mass of a car increases due to the introduction of a passenger. This affects the displacement of the car on its suspension
system. (credit: exfordy on Flickr)
What is the force constant for the suspension system of a car that settles 1.20 cm when an 80.0-kg person gets in?
Strategy
Consider the car to be in its equilibrium position before the person gets in. The car then settles down 1.20 cm,
which means it is displaced to a position . At that point, the springs supply a restoring force
equal to the person’s weight . We take this force to be in Hooke’s law.
Knowing and , we can then solve the force constant .
Solution
1. Solve Hooke’s law, ,for :
16.2
Substitute known values and solve :
16.3
Discussion
Note that and have opposite signs because they are in opposite directions—the restoring force is up, and the
displacement is down. Also, note that the car would oscillate up and down when the person got in if it were not for
damping (due to frictional forces) provided by shock absorbers. Bouncing cars are a sure sign of bad shock
absorbers.
Energy in Hooke’s Law of Deformation
In order to produce a deformation, work must be done. That is, a force must be exerted through a distance, whether
you pluck a guitar string or compress a car spring. If the only result is deformation, and no work goes into thermal,
sound, or kinetic energy, then all the work is initially stored in the deformed object as some form of potential energy.
The potential energy stored in a spring is . Here, we generalize the idea to elastic potential energy for a
deformation of any system that can be described by Hooke’s law. Hence,
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 699
16.1 • Hooke’s Law: Stress and Strain Revisited 681
16.4
where is theelastic potential energystored in any deformed system that obeys Hooke’s law and has a
displacement from equilibrium and a force constant .
It is possible to find the work done in deforming a system in order to find the energy stored. This work is performed
by an applied force . The applied force is exactly opposite to the restoring force (action-reaction), and so
.Figure 16.6shows a graph of the applied force versus deformation for a system that can be described
by Hooke’s law. Work done on the system is force multiplied by distance, which equals the area under the curve or
(Method A in the figure). Another way to determine the work is to note that the force increases linearly
from 0 to , so that the average force is , the distance moved is , and thus
(Method B in the figure).
FIGURE16.6A graph of applied force versus distance for the deformation of a system that can be described by Hooke’s law is displayed.
The work done on the system equals the area under the graph or the area of the triangle, which is half its base multiplied by its height, or
.
EXAMPLE 16.2
Calculating Stored Energy: A Toy Gun Spring
We can use a toy gun’s spring mechanism to ask and answer two simple questions: (a) How much energy is stored in
the spring of a toy gun that has a force constant of 50.0 N/m and is compressed 0.150 m? (b) If you neglect friction
and the mass of the spring, at what speed will a 2.00-g projectile be ejected from the gun?
FIGURE16.7(a) In this image of the gun, the spring is uncompressed before being cocked. (b) The spring has been compressed a distance
PAGE: 700
682 16 • Oscillatory Motion and Waves
, and the projectile is in place. (c) When released, the spring converts elastic potential energy into kinetic energy.
Strategy for a
(a): The energy stored in the spring can be found directly from elastic potential energy equation, because and
are given.
Solution for a
Entering the given values for and yields
16.5
Strategy for b
Because there is no friction, the potential energy is converted entirely into kinetic energy. The expression for kinetic
energy can be solved for the projectile’s speed.
Solution for b
1. Identify known quantities:
16.6
2. Solve for :
16.7
3. Convert units:
Discussion
(a) and (b): This projectile speed is impressive for a toy gun (more than 80 km/h). The numbers in this problem seem
reasonable. The force needed to compress the spring is small enough for an adult to manage, and the energy
imparted to the dart is small enough to limit the damage it might do, especially because the darts in many of these
guns are made of soft material with a rubber tip. Yet, the speed of the dart is great enough for it to travel an
acceptable distance.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Envision holding the end of a ruler with one hand and deforming it with the other. When you let go, you can see the
oscillations of the ruler. In what way could you modify this simple experiment to increase the rigidity of the system?
Solution
You could hold the ruler at its midpoint so that the part of the ruler that oscillates is half as long as in the original
experiment.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
If you apply a deforming force on an object and let it come to equilibrium, what happened to the work you did on the
system?
Solution
It was stored in the object as potential energy.
16.2 Period and Frequency in Oscillations
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Observe the vibrations of a guitar string.
• Determine the frequency of oscillations.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 701
16.2 • Period and Frequency in Oscillations 683
FIGURE16.8The strings on this guitar vibrate at regular time intervals. (credit: JAR)
When you pluck a guitar string, the resulting sound has a steady tone and lasts a long time. Each successive
vibration of the string takes the same time as the previous one. We defineperiodic motionto be a motion that
repeats itself at regular time intervals, such as exhibited by the guitar string or by an object on a spring moving up
and down. The time to complete one oscillation remains constant and is called theperiod . Its units are usually
seconds, but may be any convenient unit of time. The word period refers to the time for some event whether
repetitive or not; but we shall be primarily interested in periodic motion, which is by definition repetitive. A concept
closely related to period is the frequency of an event. For example, if you get a paycheck twice a month, the
frequency of payment is two per month and the period between checks is half a month.Frequency is defined to
be the number of events per unit time. For periodic motion, frequency is the number of oscillations per unit time.
The relationship between frequency and period is
16.8
The SI unit for frequency is thecycle per second, which is defined to be ahertz(Hz):
16.9
A cycle is one complete oscillation. Note that a vibration can be a single or multiple event, whereas oscillations are
usually repetitive for a significant number of cycles.
EXAMPLE 16.3
Determine the Frequency of Two Oscillations: Medical Ultrasound and the Period of Middle C
We can use the formulas presented in this module to determine both the frequency based on known oscillations and
the oscillation based on a known frequency. Let’s try one example of each. (a) A medical imaging device produces
ultrasound by oscillating with a period of 0.400 µs. What is the frequency of this oscillation? (b) The frequency of
middle C on a typical musical instrument is 264 Hz. What is the time for one complete oscillation?
Strategy
Both questions (a) and (b) can be answered using the relationship between period and frequency. In question (a),
the period is given and we are asked to find frequency . In question (b), the frequency is given and we are
asked to find the period .
Solution a
1. Substitute for in :
16.10
Solve to find
16.11
PAGE: 702
684 16 • Oscillatory Motion and Waves
Discussion a
The frequency of sound found in (a) is much higher than the highest frequency that humans can hear and, therefore,
is called ultrasound. Appropriate oscillations at this frequency generate ultrasound used for noninvasive medical
diagnoses, such as observations of a fetus in the womb.
Solution b
1. Identify the known values:
The time for one complete oscillation is the period :
16.12
2. Solve for :
16.13
3. Substitute the given value for the frequency into the resulting expression:
16.14
Discussion b
The period found in (b) is the time per cycle, but this value is often quoted as simply the time in convenient units (ms
or milliseconds in this case).
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Identify an event in your life (such as receiving a paycheck) that occurs regularly. Identify both the period and
frequency of this event.
Solution
I visit my parents for dinner every other Sunday. The frequency of my visits is 26 per calendar year. The period is two
weeks.
16.3 Simple Harmonic Motion: A Special Periodic Motion
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe a simple harmonic oscillator.
• Explain the link between simple harmonic motion and waves.
The oscillations of a system in which the net force can be described by Hooke’s law are of special importance,
because they are very common. They are also the simplest oscillatory systems.Simple Harmonic Motion(SHM) is
the name given to oscillatory motion for a system where the net force can be described by Hooke’s law, and such a
system is called asimple harmonic oscillator. If the net force can be described by Hooke’s law and there is no
damping(by friction or other non-conservative forces), then a simple harmonic oscillator will oscillate with equal
displacement on either side of the equilibrium position, as shown for an object on a spring inFigure 16.9. The
maximum displacement from equilibrium is called theamplitude . The units for amplitude and displacement are
the same, but depend on the type of oscillation. For the object on the spring, the units of amplitude and
displacement are meters; whereas for sound oscillations, they have units of pressure (and other types of oscillations
have yet other units). Because amplitude is the maximum displacement, it is related to the energy in the oscillation.
Take-Home Experiment: SHM and the Marble
Find a bowl or basin that is shaped like a hemisphere on the inside. Place a marble inside the bowl and tilt the
bowl periodically so the marble rolls from the bottom of the bowl to equally high points on the sides of the bowl.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 703
16.3 • Simple Harmonic Motion: A Special Periodic Motion 685
Get a feel for the force required to maintain this periodic motion. What is the restoring force and what role does
the force you apply play in the simple harmonic motion (SHM) of the marble?
FIGURE16.9An object attached to a spring sliding on a frictionless surface is an uncomplicated simple harmonic oscillator. When
displaced from equilibrium, the object performs simple harmonic motion that has an amplitude and a period . The object’s maximum
speed occurs as it passes through equilibrium. The stiffer the spring is, the smaller the period . The greater the mass of the object is, the
greater the period .
What is so significant about simple harmonic motion? One special thing is that the period and frequency of a
simple harmonic oscillator are independent of amplitude. The string of a guitar, for example, will oscillate with the
same frequency whether plucked gently or hard. Because the period is constant, a simple harmonic oscillator can be
used as a clock.
Two important factors do affect the period of a simple harmonic oscillator. The period is related to how stiff the
system is. A very stiff object has a large force constant , which causes the system to have a smaller period. For
example, you can adjust a diving board’s stiffness—the stiffer it is, the faster it vibrates, and the shorter its period.
Period also depends on the mass of the oscillating system. The more massive the system is, the longer the period.
For example, a heavy person on a diving board bounces up and down more slowly than a light one.
In fact, the mass and the force constant are theonlyfactors that affect the period and frequency of simple
harmonic motion.
Period of Simple Harmonic Oscillator
Theperiod of a simple harmonic oscillatoris given by
16.15
and, because , thefrequency of a simple harmonic oscillatoris
16.16
Note that neither nor has any dependence on amplitude.
PAGE: 704
686 16 • Oscillatory Motion and Waves
Take-Home Experiment: Mass and Ruler Oscillations
Find two identical wooden or plastic rulers. Tape one end of each ruler firmly to the edge of a table so that the
length of each ruler that protrudes from the table is the same. On the free end of one ruler tape a heavy object
such as a few large coins. Pluck the ends of the rulers at the same time and observe which one undergoes more
cycles in a time period, and measure the period of oscillation of each of the rulers.
EXAMPLE 16.4
Calculate the Frequency and Period of Oscillations: Bad Shock Absorbers in a Car
If the shock absorbers in a car go bad, then the car will oscillate at the least provocation, such as when going over
bumps in the road and after stopping (SeeFigure 16.10). Calculate the frequency and period of these oscillations for
such a car if the car’s mass (including its load) is 900 kg and the force constant ( ) of the suspension system is
.
Strategy
The frequency of the car’s oscillations will be that of a simple harmonic oscillator as given in the equation
. The mass and the force constant are both given.
Solution
1. Enter the known values ofkandm:
16.17
2. Calculate the frequency:
16.18
3. You could use to calculate the period, but it is simpler to use the relationship and
substitute the value just found for :
16.19
Discussion
The values of and both seem about right for a bouncing car. You can observe these oscillations if you push down
hard on the end of a car and let go.
The Link between Simple Harmonic Motion and Waves
If a time-exposure photograph of the bouncing car were taken as it drove by, the headlight would make a wavelike
streak, as shown inFigure 16.10. Similarly,Figure 16.11shows an object bouncing on a spring as it leaves a
wavelike "trace" of its position on a moving strip of paper. Both waves are sine functions. All simple harmonic motion
is intimately related to sine and cosine waves.
FIGURE16.10The bouncing car makes a wavelike motion. If the restoring force in the suspension system can be described only by Hooke’s
law, then the wave is a sine function. (The wave is the trace produced by the headlight as the car moves to the right.)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 705
16.3 • Simple Harmonic Motion: A Special Periodic Motion 687
FIGURE16.11The vertical position of an object bouncing on a spring is recorded on a strip of moving paper, leaving a sine wave.
The displacement as a function of timetin any simple harmonic motion—that is, one in which the net restoring force
can be described by Hooke’s law, is given by
16.20
where is amplitude. At , the initial position is , and the displacement oscillates back and forth with a
period .(When , we get again because .). Furthermore, from this expression for , the
velocity as a function of time is given by:
16.21
where . The object has zero velocity at maximum displacement—for example,
when , and at that time . The minus sign in the first equation for gives the correct direction for the
velocity. Just after the start of the motion, for instance, the velocity is negative because the system is moving back
toward the equilibrium point. Finally, we can get an expression for acceleration using Newton’s second law. [Then
we have and , the quantities needed for kinematics and a description of simple harmonic motion.]
According to Newton’s second law, the acceleration is .So, is also a cosine function:
16.22
Hence, is directly proportional to and in the opposite direction to .
Figure 16.12shows the simple harmonic motion of an object on a spring and presents graphs of and
versus time.
PAGE: 706
688 16 • Oscillatory Motion and Waves
FIGURE16.12Graphs of and versus for the motion of an object on a spring. The net force on the object can be described by
Hooke’s law, and so the object undergoes simple harmonic motion. Note that the initial position has the vertical displacement at its
maximum value ; is initially zero and then negative as the object moves down; and the initial acceleration is negative, back toward the
equilibrium position and becomes zero at that point.
The most important point here is that these equations are mathematically straightforward and are valid for all
simple harmonic motion. They are very useful in visualizing waves associated with simple harmonic motion,
including visualizing how waves add with one another.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Suppose you pluck a banjo string. You hear a single note that starts out loud and slowly quiets over time. Describe
what happens to the sound waves in terms of period, frequency and amplitude as the sound decreases in volume.
Solution
Frequency and period remain essentially unchanged. Only amplitude decreases as volume decreases.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
A babysitter is pushing a child on a swing. At the point where the swing reaches , where would the corresponding
point on a wave of this motion be located?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 707
16.4 • The Simple Pendulum 689
Solution
is the maximum deformation, which corresponds to the amplitude of the wave. The point on the wave would
either be at the very top or the very bottom of the curve.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Masses and Springs
A realistic mass and spring laboratory. Hang masses from springs and adjust the spring stiffness and damping. You
can even slow time. Transport the lab to different planets. A chart shows the kinetic, potential, and thermal energy
for each spring.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/16-3-simple-harmonic-motion-a-
special-periodic-motion)
16.4 The Simple Pendulum
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Measure acceleration due to gravity.
FIGURE16.13A simple pendulum has a small-diameter bob and a string that has a very small mass but is strong enough not to stretch
appreciably. The linear displacement from equilibrium is , the length of the arc. Also shown are the forces on the bob, which result in a net
force of toward the equilibrium position—that is, a restoring force.
Pendulums are in common usage. Some have crucial uses, such as in clocks; some are for fun, such as a child’s
swing; and some are just there, such as the sinker on a fishing line. For small displacements, a pendulum is a simple
harmonic oscillator. Asimple pendulumis defined to have an object that has a small mass, also known as the
pendulum bob, which is suspended from a light wire or string, such as shown inFigure 16.13. Exploring the simple
pendulum a bit further, we can discover the conditions under which it performs simple harmonic motion, and we can
derive an interesting expression for its period.
We begin by defining the displacement to be the arc length . We see fromFigure 16.13that the net force on the
bob is tangent to the arc and equals . (The weight has components along the string and
tangent to the arc.) Tension in the string exactly cancels the component parallel to the string.
This leaves anetrestoring force back toward the equilibrium position at .
Now, if we can show that the restoring force is directly proportional to the displacement, then we have a simple
harmonic oscillator. In trying to determine if we have a simple harmonic oscillator, we should note that for small
angles (less than about ), ( and differ by about 1% or less at smaller angles). Thus, for angles
less than about , the restoring force is
16.23
The displacement is directly proportional to . When is expressed in radians, the arc length in a circle is related
to its radius ( in this instance) by:
PAGE: 708
690 16 • Oscillatory Motion and Waves
16.24
so that
16.25
For small angles, then, the expression for the restoring force is:
16.26
This expression is of the form:
16.27
where the force constant is given by and the displacement is given by . For angles less than about
, the restoring force is directly proportional to the displacement, and the simple pendulum is a simple harmonic
oscillator.
Using this equation, we can find the period of a pendulum for amplitudes less than about . For the simple
pendulum:
16.28
Thus,
16.29
for the period of a simple pendulum. This result is interesting because of its simplicity. The only things that affect
the period of a simple pendulum are its length and the acceleration due to gravity. The period is completely
independent of other factors, such as mass. As with simple harmonic oscillators, the period for a pendulum is
nearly independent of amplitude, especially if is less than about . Even simple pendulum clocks can be finely
adjusted and accurate.
Note the dependence of on . If the length of a pendulum is precisely known, it can actually be used to measure
the acceleration due to gravity. Consider the following example.
EXAMPLE 16.5
Measuring Acceleration due to Gravity: The Period of a Pendulum
What is the acceleration due to gravity in a region where a simple pendulum having a length 75.000 cm has a period
of 1.7357 s?
Strategy
We are asked to find given the period and the length of a pendulum. We can solve for ,
assuming only that the angle of deflection is less than .
Solution
1. Square and solve for :
16.30
2. Substitute known values into the new equation:
16.31
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 709
16.5 • Energy and the Simple Harmonic Oscillator 691
3. Calculate to find :
16.32
Discussion
This method for determining can be very accurate. This is why length and period are given to five digits in this
example. For the precision of the approximation to be better than the precision of the pendulum length
and period, the maximum displacement angle should be kept below about .
Making Career Connections
Knowing can be important in geological exploration; for example, a map of over large geographical regions
aids the study of plate tectonics and helps in the search for oil fields and large mineral deposits.
Take Home Experiment: Determining
Use a simple pendulum to determine the acceleration due to gravity in your own locale. Cut a piece of a string
or dental floss so that it is about 1 m long. Attach a small object of high density to the end of the string (for
example, a metal nut or a car key). Starting at an angle of less than , allow the pendulum to swing and
measure the pendulum’s period for 10 oscillations using a stopwatch. Calculate . How accurate is this
measurement? How might it be improved?
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
An engineer builds two simple pendula. Both are suspended from small wires secured to the ceiling of a room. Each
pendulum hovers 2 cm above the floor. Pendulum 1 has a bob with a mass of . Pendulum 2 has a bob with a
mass of . Describe how the motion of the pendula will differ if the bobs are both displaced by .
Solution
The movement of the pendula will not differ at all because the mass of the bob has no effect on the motion of a
simple pendulum. The pendula are only affected by the period (which is related to the pendulum’s length) and by
the acceleration due to gravity.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Pendulum Lab
Play with one or two pendulums and discover how the period of a simple pendulum depends on the length of the
string, the mass of the pendulum bob, and the amplitude of the swing. It’s easy to measure the period using the
photogate timer. You can vary friction and the strength of gravity. Use the pendulum to find the value of on planet
X. Notice the anharmonic behavior at large amplitude.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/16-4-the-simple-pendulum)
16.5 Energy and the Simple Harmonic Oscillator
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Determine the maximum speed of an oscillating system.
To study the energy of a simple harmonic oscillator, we first consider all the forms of energy it can have We know
fromHooke’s Law: Stress and Strain Revisitedthat the energy stored in the deformation of a simple harmonic
oscillator is a form of potential energy given by:
PAGE: 710
692 16 • Oscillatory Motion and Waves
16.33
Because a simple harmonic oscillator has no dissipative forces, the other important form of energy is kinetic energy
. Conservation of energy for these two forms is:
16.34
or
16.35
This statement of conservation of energy is valid forallsimple harmonic oscillators, including ones where the
gravitational force plays a role
Namely, for a simple pendulum we replace the velocity with , the spring constant with , and the
displacement term with . Thus
16.36
In the case of undamped simple harmonic motion, the energy oscillates back and forth between kinetic and
potential, going completely from one to the other as the system oscillates. So for the simple example of an object on
a frictionless surface attached to a spring, as shown again inFigure 16.14, the motion starts with all of the energy
stored in the spring. As the object starts to move, the elastic potential energy is converted to kinetic energy,
becoming entirely kinetic energy at the equilibrium position. It is then converted back into elastic potential energy
by the spring, the velocity becomes zero when the kinetic energy is completely converted, and so on. This concept
provides extra insight here and in later applications of simple harmonic motion, such as alternating current circuits.
FIGURE16.14The transformation of energy in simple harmonic motion is illustrated for an object attached to a spring on a frictionless
surface.
The conservation of energy principle can be used to derive an expression for velocity . If we start our simple
harmonic motion with zero velocity and maximum displacement ( ), then the total energy is
16.37
This total energy is constant and is shifted back and forth between kinetic energy and potential energy, at most
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 711
16.5 • Energy and the Simple Harmonic Oscillator 693
times being shared by each. The conservation of energy for this system in equation form is thus:
16.38
Solving this equation for yields:
16.39
Manipulating this expression algebraically gives:
16.40
and so
16.41
where
16.42
From this expression, we see that the velocity is a maximum ( ) at , as stated earlier in
.Notice that the maximum velocity depends on three factors. Maximum velocity is directly
proportional to amplitude. As you might guess, the greater the maximum displacement the greater the maximum
velocity. Maximum velocity is also greater for stiffer systems, because they exert greater force for the same
displacement. This observation is seen in the expression for it is proportional to the square root of the force
constant . Finally, the maximum velocity is smaller for objects that have larger masses, because the maximum
velocity is inversely proportional to the square root of . For a given force, objects that have large masses accelerate
more slowly.
A similar calculation for the simple pendulum produces a similar result, namely:
16.43
EXAMPLE 16.6
Determine the Maximum Speed of an Oscillating System: A Bumpy Road
Suppose that a car is 900 kg and has a suspension system that has a force constant . The car
hits a bump and bounces with an amplitude of 0.100 m. What is its maximum vertical velocity if you assume no
damping occurs?
Strategy
We can use the expression for given in to determine the maximum vertical velocity. The
variables and are given in the problem statement, and the maximum displacement is 0.100 m.
Solution
1. Identify known.
2. Substitute known values into :
PAGE: 712
694 16 • Oscillatory Motion and Waves
16.44
3. Calculate to find
Discussion
This answer seems reasonable for a bouncing car. There are other ways to use conservation of energy to find .
We could use it directly, as was done in the example featured inHooke’s Law: Stress and Strain Revisited.
The small vertical displacement of an oscillating simple pendulum, starting from its equilibrium position, is given
as
16.45
where is the amplitude, is the angular velocity and is the time taken. Substituting , we have
16.46
Thus, the displacement of pendulum is a function of time as shown above.
Also the velocity of the pendulum is given by
16.47
so the motion of the pendulum is a function of time.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Why does it hurt more if your hand is snapped with a ruler than with a loose spring, even if the displacement of each
system is equal?
Solution
The ruler is a stiffer system, which carries greater force for the same amount of displacement. The ruler snaps your
hand with greater force, which hurts more.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
You are observing a simple harmonic oscillator. Identify one way you could decrease the maximum velocity of the
system.
Solution
You could increase the mass of the object that is oscillating.
16.6 Uniform Circular Motion and Simple Harmonic Motion
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Compare simple harmonic motion with uniform circular motion.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 713
16.6 • Uniform Circular Motion and Simple Harmonic Motion 695
FIGURE16.15The horses on this merry-go-round exhibit uniform circular motion. (credit: Wonderlane, Flickr)
There is an easy way to produce simple harmonic motion by using uniform circular motion.Figure 16.16shows one
way of using this method. A ball is attached to a uniformly rotating vertical turntable, and its shadow is projected on
the floor as shown. The shadow undergoes simple harmonic motion. Hooke’s law usually describes uniform circular
motions ( constant) rather than systems that have large visible displacements. So observing the projection of
uniform circular motion, as inFigure 16.16, is often easier than observing a precise large-scale simple harmonic
oscillator. If studied in sufficient depth, simple harmonic motion produced in this manner can give considerable
insight into many aspects of oscillations and waves and is very useful mathematically. In our brief treatment, we
shall indicate some of the major features of this relationship and how they might be useful.
FIGURE16.16The shadow of a ball rotating at constant angular velocity on a turntable goes back and forth in precise simple harmonic
motion.
Figure 16.17shows the basic relationship between uniform circular motion and simple harmonic motion. The point
P travels around the circle at constant angular velocity . The point P is analogous to an object on the merry-go-
round. The projection of the position of P onto a fixed axis undergoes simple harmonic motion and is analogous to
the shadow of the object. At the time shown in the figure, the projection has position and moves to the left with
velocity . The velocity of the point P around the circle equals .The projection of on the -axis is the
velocity of the simple harmonic motion along the -axis.
PAGE: 714
696 16 • Oscillatory Motion and Waves
FIGURE16.17A point P moving on a circular path with a constant angular velocity is undergoing uniform circular motion. Its projection
on the x-axis undergoes simple harmonic motion. Also shown is the velocity of this point around the circle, , and its projection, which
is . Note that these velocities form a similar triangle to the displacement triangle.
To see that the projection undergoes simple harmonic motion, note that its position is given by
16.48
where , is the constant angular velocity, and is the radius of the circular path. Thus,
16.49
The angular velocity is in radians per unit time; in this case radians is the time for one revolution . That is,
. Substituting this expression for , we see that the position is given by:
16.50
This expression is the same one we had for the position of a simple harmonic oscillator inSimple Harmonic Motion:
A Special Periodic Motion. If we make a graph of position versus time as inFigure 16.18, we see again the wavelike
character (typical of simple harmonic motion) of the projection of uniform circular motion onto the -axis.
FIGURE16.18The position of the projection of uniform circular motion performs simple harmonic motion, as this wavelike graph of
versus indicates.
Now let us useFigure 16.17to do some further analysis of uniform circular motion as it relates to simple harmonic
motion. The triangle formed by the velocities in the figure and the triangle formed by the displacements ( and
) are similar right triangles. Taking ratios of similar sides, we see that
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 715
16.7 • Damped Harmonic Motion 697
16.51
We can solve this equation for the speed or
16.52
This expression for the speed of a simple harmonic oscillator is exactly the same as the equation obtained from
conservation of energy considerations inEnergy and the Simple Harmonic Oscillator.You can begin to see that it is
possible to get all of the characteristics of simple harmonic motion from an analysis of the projection of uniform
circular motion.
Finally, let us consider the period of the motion of the projection. This period is the time it takes the point P to
complete one revolution. That time is the circumference of the circle divided by the velocity around the circle,
. Thus, the period is
16.53
We know from conservation of energy considerations that
16.54
Solving this equation for gives
16.55
Substituting this expression into the equation for yields
16.56
Thus, the period of the motion is the same as for a simple harmonic oscillator. We have determined the period for
any simple harmonic oscillator using the relationship between uniform circular motion and simple harmonic motion.
Some modules occasionally refer to the connection between uniform circular motion and simple harmonic motion.
Moreover, if you carry your study of physics and its applications to greater depths, you will find this relationship
useful. It can, for example, help to analyze how waves add when they are superimposed.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Identify an object that undergoes uniform circular motion. Describe how you could trace the simple harmonic
motion of this object as a wave.
Solution
A record player undergoes uniform circular motion. You could attach dowel rod to one point on the outside edge of
the turntable and attach a pen to the other end of the dowel. As the record player turns, the pen will move. You can
drag a long piece of paper under the pen, capturing its motion as a wave.
16.7 Damped Harmonic Motion
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Compare and discuss underdamped and overdamped oscillating systems.
• Explain critically damped system.
PAGE: 716
698 16 • Oscillatory Motion and Waves
FIGURE16.19In order to counteract dampening forces, this mom needs to keep pushing the swing. (credit: Erik A. Johnson, Flickr)
A guitar string stops oscillating a few seconds after being plucked. To keep a child happy on a swing, you must keep
pushing. Although we can often make friction and other non-conservative forces negligibly small, completely
undamped motion is rare. In fact, we may even want to damp oscillations, such as with car shock absorbers.
For a system that has a small amount of damping, the period and frequency are nearly the same as for simple
harmonic motion, but the amplitude gradually decreases as shown inFigure 16.20. This occurs because the non-
conservative damping force removes energy from the system, usually in the form of thermal energy. In general,
energy removal by non-conservative forces is described as
16.57
where is work done by a non-conservative force (here the damping force). For a damped harmonic oscillator,
is negative because it removes mechanical energy (KE + PE) from the system.
FIGURE16.20In this graph of displacement versus time for a harmonic oscillator with a small amount of damping, the amplitude slowly
decreases, but the period and frequency are nearly the same as if the system were completely undamped.
If you graduallyincreasethe amount of damping in a system, the period and frequency begin to be affected,
because damping opposes and hence slows the back and forth motion. (The net force is smaller in both directions.)
If there is very large damping, the system does not even oscillate—it slowly moves toward equilibrium.Figure 16.21
shows the displacement of a harmonic oscillator for different amounts of damping. When we want to damp out
oscillations, such as in the suspension of a car, we may want the system to return to equilibrium as quickly as
possibleCritical dampingis defined as the condition in which the damping of an oscillator results in it returning as
quickly as possible to its equilibrium position The critically damped system may overshoot the equilibrium position,
but if it does, it will do so only once. Critical damping is represented by Curve A inFigure 16.21. With less-than
critical damping, the system will return to equilibrium faster but will overshoot and cross over one or more times.
Such a system isunderdamped; its displacement is represented by the curve inFigure 16.20. Curve B inFigure
16.21represents anoverdampedsystem. As with critical damping, it too may overshoot the equilibrium position,
but will reach equilibrium over a longer period of time.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 717
16.7 • Damped Harmonic Motion 699
FIGURE16.21Displacement versus time for a critically damped harmonic oscillator (A) and an overdamped harmonic oscillator (B). The
critically damped oscillator returns to equilibrium at in the smallest time possible without overshooting.
Critical damping is often desired, because such a system returns to equilibrium rapidly and remains at equilibrium
as well. In addition, a constant force applied to a critically damped system moves the system to a new equilibrium
position in the shortest time possible without overshooting or oscillating about the new position. For example, when
you stand on bathroom scales that have a needle gauge, the needle moves to its equilibrium position without
oscillating. It would be quite inconvenient if the needle oscillated about the new equilibrium position for a long time
before settling. Damping forces can vary greatly in character. Friction, for example, is sometimes independent of
velocity (as assumed in most places in this text). But many damping forces depend on velocity—sometimes in
complex ways, sometimes simply being proportional to velocity.
EXAMPLE 16.7
Damping an Oscillatory Motion: Friction on an Object Connected to a Spring
Damping oscillatory motion is important in many systems, and the ability to control the damping is even more so.
This is generally attained using non-conservative forces such as the friction between surfaces, and viscosity for
objects moving through fluids. The following example considers friction. Suppose a 0.200-kg object is connected to
a spring as shown inFigure 16.22, but there is simple friction between the object and the surface, and the
coefficient of friction is equal to 0.0800. (a) What is the frictional force between the surfaces? (b) What total
distance does the object travel if it is released 0.100 m from equilibrium, starting at ? The force constant of the
spring is .
FIGURE16.22The transformation of energy in simple harmonic motion is illustrated for an object attached to a spring on a frictionless
surface.
PAGE: 718
700 16 • Oscillatory Motion and Waves
Strategy
This problem requires you to integrate your knowledge of various concepts regarding waves, oscillations, and
damping. To solve an integrated concept problem, you must first identify the physical principles involved. Part (a) is
about the frictional force. This is a topic involving the application of Newton’s Laws. Part (b) requires an
understanding of work and conservation of energy, as well as some understanding of horizontal oscillatory systems.
Now that we have identified the principles we must apply in order to solve the problems, we need to identify the
knowns and unknowns for each part of the question, as well as the quantity that is constant in Part (a) and Part (b)
of the question.
Solution a
1. Choose the proper equation: Friction is .
2. Identify the known values.
3. Enter the known values into the equation:
16.58
4. Calculate and convert units:
Discussion a
The force here is small because the system and the coefficients are small.
Solution b
Identify the known:
• The system involves elastic potential energy as the spring compresses and expands, friction that is related to
the work done, and the kinetic energy as the body speeds up and slows down.
• Energy is not conserved as the mass oscillates because friction is a non-conservative force.
• The motion is horizontal, so gravitational potential energy does not need to be considered.
• Because the motion starts from rest, the energy in the system is initially . This energy is
removed by work done by friction , where is the total distance traveled and is the force
of friction. When the system stops moving, the friction force will balance the force exerted by the spring, so
where is the final position and is given by
16.59
1. By equating the work done to the energy removed, solve for the distance .
2. The work done by the non-conservative forces equals the initial, stored elastic potential energy. Identify the
correct equation to use:
16.60
3. Recall that .
4. Enter the friction as into , thus
16.61
5. Combine these two equations to find
16.62
6. Solve the equation for :
16.63
7. Enter the known values into the resulting equation:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 719
16.8 • Forced Oscillations and Resonance 701
16.64
8. Calculate and convert units:
16.65
Discussion b
This is the total distance traveled back and forth across , which is the undamped equilibrium position. The
number of oscillations about the equilibrium position will be more than because
the amplitude of the oscillations is decreasing with time. At the end of the motion, this system will not return to
for this type of damping force, because static friction will exceed the restoring force. This system is
underdamped. In contrast, an overdamped system with a simple constant damping force would not cross the
equilibrium position a single time. For example, if this system had a damping force 20 times greater, it would
only move 0.0484 m toward the equilibrium position from its original 0.100-m position.
This worked example illustrates how to apply problem-solving strategies to situations that integrate the different
concepts you have learned. The first step is to identify the physical principles involved in the problem. The second
step is to solve for the unknowns using familiar problem-solving strategies. These are found throughout the text,
and many worked examples show how to use them for single topics. In this integrated concepts example, you can
see how to apply them across several topics. You will find these techniques useful in applications of physics outside
a physics course, such as in your profession, in other science disciplines, and in everyday life.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Why are completely undamped harmonic oscillators so rare?
Solution
Friction often comes into play whenever an object is moving. Friction causes damping in a harmonic oscillator.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Describe the difference between overdamping, underdamping, and critical damping.
Solution
An overdamped system moves slowly toward equilibrium. An underdamped system moves quickly to equilibrium,
but will oscillate about the equilibrium point as it does so. A critically damped system moves as quickly as possible
toward equilibrium without oscillating about the equilibrium.
16.8 Forced Oscillations and Resonance
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Observe resonance of a paddle ball on a string.
• Observe amplitude of a damped harmonic oscillator.
PAGE: 720
702 16 • Oscillatory Motion and Waves
FIGURE16.23You can cause the strings in a piano to vibrate simply by producing sound waves from your voice. (credit: Matt Billings,
Flickr)
Sit in front of a piano sometime and sing a loud brief note at it with the dampers off its strings. It will sing the same
note back at you—the strings, having the same frequencies as your voice, are resonating in response to the forces
from the sound waves that you sent to them. Your voice and a piano’s strings is a good example of the fact that
objects—in this case, piano strings—can be forced to oscillate but oscillate best at their natural frequency. In this
section, we shall briefly explore applying aperiodic driving forceacting on a simple harmonic oscillator. The driving
force puts energy into the system at a certain frequency, not necessarily the same as the natural frequency of the
system. Thenatural frequencyis the frequency at which a system would oscillate if there were no driving and no
damping force.
Most of us have played with toys involving an object supported on an elastic band, something like the paddle ball
suspended from a finger inFigure 16.24. Imagine the finger in the figure is your finger. At first you hold your finger
steady, and the ball bounces up and down with a small amount of damping. If you move your finger up and down
slowly, the ball will follow along without bouncing much on its own. As you increase the frequency at which you
move your finger up and down, the ball will respond by oscillating with increasing amplitude. When you drive the ball
at its natural frequency, the ball’s oscillations increase in amplitude with each oscillation for as long as you drive it.
The phenomenon of driving a system with a frequency equal to its natural frequency is calledresonance. A system
being driven at its natural frequency is said toresonate. As the driving frequency gets progressively higher than the
resonant or natural frequency, the amplitude of the oscillations becomes smaller, until the oscillations nearly
disappear and your finger simply moves up and down with little effect on the ball.
FIGURE16.24The paddle ball on its rubber band moves in response to the finger supporting it. If the finger moves with the natural
frequency of the ball on the rubber band, then a resonance is achieved, and the amplitude of the ball’s oscillations increases
dramatically. At higher and lower driving frequencies, energy is transferred to the ball less efficiently, and it responds with lower-amplitude
oscillations.
Figure 16.25shows a graph of the amplitude of a damped harmonic oscillator as a function of the frequency of the
periodic force driving it. There are three curves on the graph, each representing a different amount of damping. All
three curves peak at the point where the frequency of the driving force equals the natural frequency of the harmonic
oscillator. The highest peak, or greatest response, is for the least amount of damping, because less energy is
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 721
16.8 • Forced Oscillations and Resonance 703
removed by the damping force.
FIGURE16.25Amplitude of a harmonic oscillator as a function of the frequency of the driving force. The curves represent the same
oscillator with the same natural frequency but with different amounts of damping. Resonance occurs when the driving frequency equals the
natural frequency, and the greatest response is for the least amount of damping. The narrowest response is also for the least damping.
It is interesting that the widths of the resonance curves shown inFigure 16.25depend on damping: the less the
damping, the narrower the resonance. The message is that if you want a driven oscillator to resonate at a very
specific frequency, you need as little damping as possible. Little damping is the case for piano strings and many
other musical instruments. Conversely, if you want small-amplitude oscillations, such as in a car’s suspension
system, then you want heavy damping. Heavy damping reduces the amplitude, but the tradeoff is that the system
responds at more frequencies.
These features of driven harmonic oscillators apply to a huge variety of systems. When you tune a radio, for
example, you are adjusting its resonant frequency so that it only oscillates to the desired station’s broadcast
(driving) frequency. The more selective the radio is in discriminating between stations, the smaller its damping.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a widely used medical diagnostic tool in which atomic nuclei (mostly hydrogen
nuclei) are made to resonate by incoming radio waves (on the order of 100 MHz). A child on a swing is driven by a
parent at the swing’s natural frequency to achieve maximum amplitude. In all of these cases, the efficiency of
energy transfer from the driving force into the oscillator is best at resonance. Speed bumps and gravel roads prove
that even a car’s suspension system is not immune to resonance. In spite of finely engineered shock absorbers,
which ordinarily convert mechanical energy to thermal energy almost as fast as it comes in, speed bumps still cause
a large-amplitude oscillation. On gravel roads that are corrugated, you may have noticed that if you travel at the
“wrong” speed, the bumps are very noticeable whereas at other speeds you may hardly feel the bumps at all.Figure
16.26shows a photograph of a famous example (the Tacoma Narrows Bridge) of the destructive effects of a driven
harmonic oscillation. The Millennium Bridge in London was closed for a short period of time for the same reason
while inspections were carried out.
In our bodies, the chest cavity is a clear example of a system at resonance. The diaphragm and chest wall drive the
oscillations of the chest cavity which result in the lungs inflating and deflating. The system is critically damped and
the muscular diaphragm oscillates at the resonant value for the system, making it highly efficient.
PAGE: 722
704 16 • Oscillatory Motion and Waves
FIGURE16.26In 1940, the Tacoma Narrows Bridge in Washington state collapsed. Heavy cross winds drove the bridge into oscillations at
its resonant frequency. Damping decreased when support cables broke loose and started to slip over the towers, allowing increasingly
greater amplitudes until the structure failed (credit: PRI'sStudio 360, via Flickr)
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
A famous magic trick involves a performer singing a note toward a crystal glass until the glass shatters. Explain why
the trick works in terms of resonance and natural frequency.
Solution
The performer must be singing a note that corresponds to the natural frequency of the glass. As the sound wave is
directed at the glass, the glass responds by resonating at the same frequency as the sound wave. With enough
energy introduced into the system, the glass begins to vibrate and eventually shatters.
16.9 Waves
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• State the characteristics of a wave.
• Calculate the velocity of wave propagation.
FIGURE16.27Waves in the ocean behave similarly to all other types of waves. (credit: Steve Jurveston, Flickr)
What do we mean when we say something is a wave? The most intuitive and easiest wave to imagine is the familiar
water wave. More precisely, awaveis a disturbance that propagates, or moves from the place it was created. For
water waves, the disturbance is in the surface of the water, perhaps created by a rock thrown into a pond or by a
swimmer splashing the surface repeatedly. For sound waves, the disturbance is a change in air pressure, perhaps
created by the oscillating cone inside a speaker. For earthquakes, there are several types of disturbances, including
disturbance of Earth’s surface and pressure disturbances under the surface. Even radio waves are most easily
understood using an analogy with water waves. Visualizing water waves is useful because there is more to it than
just a mental image. Water waves exhibit characteristics common to all waves, such as amplitude, period, frequency
and energy. All wave characteristics can be described by a small set of underlying principles.
A wave is a disturbance that propagates, or moves from the place it was created. The simplest waves repeat
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 723
16.9 • Waves 705
themselves for several cycles and are associated with simple harmonic motion. Let us start by considering the
simplified water wave inFigure 16.28.The wave is an up and down disturbance of the water surface. It causes a sea
gull to move up and down in simple harmonic motion as the wave crests and troughs (peaks and valleys) pass under
the bird. The time for one complete up and down motion is the wave’s period . The wave’s frequency is , as
usual. The wave itself moves to the right in the figure. This movement of the wave is actually the disturbance moving
to the right, not the water itself (or the bird would move to the right). We definewave velocity to be the speed at
which the disturbance moves. Wave velocity is sometimes also called thepropagation velocity or propagation
speed,because the disturbance propagates from one location to another.
Misconception Alert
Many people think that water waves push water from one direction to another. In fact, the particles of water
tend to stay in one location, save for moving up and down due to the energy in the wave. The energy moves
forward through the water, but the water stays in one place. If you feel yourself pushed in an ocean, what you
feel is the energy of the wave, not a rush of water.
FIGURE16.28An idealized ocean wave passes under a sea gull that bobs up and down in simple harmonic motion. The wave has a
wavelength , which is the distance between adjacent identical parts of the wave. The up and down disturbance of the surface propagates
parallel to the surface at a speed .
The water wave in the figure also has a length associated with it, called itswavelength , the distance between
adjacent identical parts of a wave. ( is the distance parallel to the direction of propagation.) The speed of
propagation is the distance the wave travels in a given time, which is one wavelength in the time of one period.
In equation form, that is
16.66
or
16.67
This fundamental relationship holds for all types of waves. For water waves, is the speed of a surface wave; for
sound, is the speed of sound; and for visible light, is the speed of light, for example.
Take-Home Experiment: Waves in a Bowl
Fill a large bowl or basin with water and wait for the water to settle so there are no ripples. Gently drop a cork
into the middle of the bowl. Estimate the wavelength and period of oscillation of the water wave that propagates
away from the cork. Remove the cork from the bowl and wait for the water to settle again. Gently drop the cork
at a height that is different from the first drop. Does the wavelength depend upon how high above the water the
cork is dropped?
PAGE: 724
706 16 • Oscillatory Motion and Waves
EXAMPLE 16.8
Calculate the Velocity of Wave Propagation: Gull in the Ocean
Calculate the wave velocity of the ocean wave inFigure 16.28if the distance between wave crests is 10.0 m and the
time for a sea gull to bob up and down is 5.00 s.
Strategy
We are asked to find . The given information tells us that and . Therefore, we can use
to find the wave velocity.
Solution
1. Enter the known values into :
16.68
2. Solve for to find
Discussion
This slow speed seems reasonable for an ocean wave. Note that the wave moves to the right in the figure at this
speed, not the varying speed at which the sea gull moves up and down.
Transverse and Longitudinal Waves
A simple wave consists of a periodic disturbance that propagates from one place to another. The wave inFigure
16.29propagates in the horizontal direction while the surface is disturbed in the vertical direction. Such a wave is
called atransverse waveor shear wave; in such a wave, the disturbance is perpendicular to the direction of
propagation. In contrast, in alongitudinal waveor compressional wave, the disturbance is parallel to the direction
of propagation.Figure 16.30shows an example of a longitudinal wave. The size of the disturbance is its amplitudeX
and is completely independent of the speed of propagation .
FIGURE16.29In this example of a transverse wave, the wave propagates horizontally, and the disturbance in the cord is in the vertical
direction.
FIGURE16.30In this example of a longitudinal wave, the wave propagates horizontally, and the disturbance in the cord is also in the
horizontal direction.
Waves may be transverse, longitudinal, ora combination of the two. (Water waves are actually a combination of
transverse and longitudinal. The simplified water wave illustrated inFigure 16.28shows no longitudinal motion of
the bird.) The waves on the strings of musical instruments are transverse—so are electromagnetic waves, such as
visible light.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 725
16.10 • Superposition and Interference 707
Sound waves in air and water are longitudinal. Their disturbances are periodic variations in pressure that are
transmitted in fluids. Fluids do not have appreciable shear strength, and thus the sound waves in them must be
longitudinal or compressional. Sound in solids can be both longitudinal and transverse.
FIGURE16.31The wave on a guitar string is transverse. The sound wave rattles a sheet of paper in a direction that shows the sound wave
is longitudinal.
Earthquake waves under Earth’s surface also have both longitudinal and transverse components (called
compressional or P-waves and shear or S-waves, respectively). These components have important individual
characteristics—they propagate at different speeds, for example. Earthquakes also have surface waves that are
similar to surface waves on water.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Why is it important to differentiate between longitudinal and transverse waves?
Solution
In the different types of waves, energy can propagate in a different direction relative to the motion of the wave. This
is important to understand how different types of waves affect the materials around them.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Wave on a String
Watch a string vibrate in slow motion. Wiggle the end of the string and make waves, or adjust the frequency and
amplitude of an oscillator. Adjust the damping and tension. The end can be fixed, loose, or open.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/16-9-waves)
16.10 Superposition and Interference
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain standing waves.
• Describe the mathematical representation of overtones and beat frequency.
PAGE: 726
708 16 • Oscillatory Motion and Waves
FIGURE16.32These waves result from the superposition of several waves from different sources, producing a complex pattern. (credit:
waterborough, Wikimedia Commons)
Most waves do not look very simple. They look more like the waves inFigure 16.32than like the simple water wave
considered inWaves. (Simple waves may be created by a simple harmonic oscillation, and thus have a sinusoidal
shape). Complex waves are more interesting, even beautiful, but they look formidable. Most waves appear complex
because they result from several simple waves adding together. Luckily, the rules for adding waves are quite simple.
When two or more waves arrive at the same point, they superimpose themselves on one another. More specifically,
the disturbances of waves are superimposed when they come together—a phenomenon calledsuperposition. Each
disturbance corresponds to a force, and forces add. If the disturbances are along the same line, then the resulting
wave is a simple addition of the disturbances of the individual waves—that is, their amplitudes add.Figure 16.33
andFigure 16.34illustrate superposition in two special cases, both of which produce simple results.
Figure 16.33shows two identical waves that arrive at the same point exactly in phase. The crests of the two waves
are precisely aligned, as are the troughs. This superposition produces pureconstructive interference. Because the
disturbances add, pure constructive interference produces a wave that has twice the amplitude of the individual
waves, but has the same wavelength.
Figure 16.34shows two identical waves that arrive exactly out of phase—that is, precisely aligned crest to
trough—producing puredestructive interference. Because the disturbances are in the opposite direction for this
superposition, the resulting amplitude is zero for pure destructive interference—the waves completely cancel.
FIGURE16.33Pure constructive interference of two identical waves produces one with twice the amplitude, but the same wavelength.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 727
16.10 • Superposition and Interference 709
FIGURE16.34Pure destructive interference of two identical waves produces zero amplitude, or complete cancellation.
While pure constructive and pure destructive interference do occur, they require precisely aligned identical waves.
The superposition of most waves produces a combination of constructive and destructive interference and can vary
from place to place and time to time. Sound from a stereo, for example, can be loud in one spot and quiet in another.
Varying loudness means the sound waves add partially constructively and partially destructively at different
locations. A stereo has at least two speakers creating sound waves, and waves can reflect from walls. All these
waves superimpose. An example of sounds that vary over time from constructive to destructive is found in the
combined whine of airplane jets heard by a stationary passenger. The combined sound can fluctuate up and down in
volume as the sound from the two engines varies in time from constructive to destructive. These examples are of
waves that are similar.
An example of the superposition of two dissimilar waves is shown inFigure 16.35. Here again, the disturbances add
and subtract, producing a more complicated looking wave.
FIGURE16.35Superposition of non-identical waves exhibits both constructive and destructive interference.
Standing Waves
Sometimes waves do not seem to move; rather, they just vibrate in place. Unmoving waves can be seen on the
surface of a glass of milk in a refrigerator, for example. Vibrations from the refrigerator motor create waves on the
milk that oscillate up and down but do not seem to move across the surface. These waves are formed by the
superposition of two or more moving waves, such as illustrated inFigure 16.36for two identical waves moving in
opposite directions. The waves move through each other with their disturbances adding as they go by. If the two
waves have the same amplitude and wavelength, then they alternate between constructive and destructive
interference. The resultant looks like a wave standing in place and, thus, is called astanding wave. Waves on the
glass of milk are one example of standing waves. There are other standing waves, such as on guitar strings and in
organ pipes. With the glass of milk, the two waves that produce standing waves may come from reflections from the
side of the glass.
A closer look at earthquakes provides evidence for conditions appropriate for resonance, standing waves, and
constructive and destructive interference. A building may be vibrated for several seconds with a driving frequency
matching that of the natural frequency of vibration of the building—producing a resonance resulting in one building
PAGE: 728
710 16 • Oscillatory Motion and Waves
collapsing while neighboring buildings do not. Often buildings of a certain height are devastated while other taller
buildings remain intact. The building height matches the condition for setting up a standing wave for that particular
height. As the earthquake waves travel along the surface of Earth and reflect off denser rocks, constructive
interference occurs at certain points. Often areas closer to the epicenter are not damaged while areas farther away
are damaged.
FIGURE16.36Standing wave created by the superposition of two identical waves moving in opposite directions. The oscillations are at
fixed locations in space and result from alternately constructive and destructive interference.
Standing waves are also found on the strings of musical instruments and are due to reflections of waves from the
ends of the string.Figure 16.37andFigure 16.38show three standing waves that can be created on a string that is
fixed at both ends.Nodesare the points where the string does not move; more generally, nodes are where the wave
disturbance is zero in a standing wave. The fixed ends of strings must be nodes, too, because the string cannot move
there. The wordantinodeis used to denote the location of maximum amplitude in standing waves. Standing waves
on strings have a frequency that is related to the propagation speed of the disturbance on the string. The
wavelength is determined by the distance between the points where the string is fixed in place.
The lowest frequency, called thefundamental frequency, is thus for the longest wavelength, which is seen to be
. Therefore, the fundamental frequency is . In this case, theovertonesor harmonics
are multiples of the fundamental frequency. As seen inFigure 16.38, the first harmonic can easily be calculated
since . Thus, . Similarly, , and so on. All of these frequencies can be
changed by adjusting the tension in the string. The greater the tension, the greater is and the higher the
frequencies. This observation is familiar to anyone who has ever observed a string instrument being tuned. We will
see in later chapters that standing waves are crucial to many resonance phenomena, such as in sounding boxes on
string instruments.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 729
16.10 • Superposition and Interference 711
FIGURE16.37The figure shows a string oscillating at its fundamental frequency.
FIGURE16.38First and second overtones are shown.
Beats
Striking two adjacent keys on a piano produces a warbling combination usually considered to be unpleasant. The
superposition of two waves of similar but not identical frequencies is the culprit. Another example is often
noticeable in jet aircraft, particularly the two-engine variety, while taxiing. The combined sound of the engines goes
up and down in loudness. This varying loudness happens because the sound waves have similar but not identical
frequencies. The discordant warbling of the piano and the fluctuating loudness of the jet engine noise are both due
to alternately constructive and destructive interference as the two waves go in and out of phase.Figure 16.39
illustrates this graphically.
FIGURE16.39Beats are produced by the superposition of two waves of slightly different frequencies but identical amplitudes. The waves
alternate in time between constructive interference and destructive interference, giving the resulting wave a time-varying amplitude.
The wave resulting from the superposition of two similar-frequency waves has a frequency that is the average of the
two. This wave fluctuates in amplitude, orbeats, with a frequency called thebeat frequency. We can determine the
beat frequency by adding two waves together mathematically. Note that a wave can be represented at one point in
space as
PAGE: 730
712 16 • Oscillatory Motion and Waves
16.69
where is the frequency of the wave. Adding two waves that have different frequencies but identical
amplitudes produces a resultant
16.70
More specifically,
16.71
Using a trigonometric identity, it can be shown that
16.72
where
16.73
is the beat frequency, and is the average of and . These results mean that the resultant wave has twice
the amplitude and the average frequency of the two superimposed waves, but it also fluctuates in overall amplitude
at the beat frequency . The first cosine term in the expression effectively causes the amplitude to go up and
down. The second cosine term is the wave with frequency . This result is valid for all types of waves. However, if
it is a sound wave, providing the two frequencies are similar, then what we hear is an average frequency that gets
louder and softer (or warbles) at the beat frequency.
Making Career Connections
Piano tuners use beats routinely in their work. When comparing a note with a tuning fork, they listen for beats
and adjust the string until the beats go away (to zero frequency). For example, if the tuning fork has a
frequency and two beats per second are heard, then the other frequency is either or . Most keys hit
multiple strings, and these strings are actually adjusted until they have nearly the same frequency and give a
slow beat for richness. Twelve-string guitars and mandolins are also tuned using beats.
While beats may sometimes be annoying in audible sounds, we will find that beats have many applications.
Observing beats is a very useful way to compare similar frequencies. There are applications of beats as apparently
disparate as in ultrasonic imaging and radar speed traps.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Imagine you are holding one end of a jump rope, and your friend holds the other. If your friend holds her end still,
you can move your end up and down, creating a transverse wave. If your friend then begins to move her end up and
down, generating a wave in the opposite direction, what resultant wave forms would you expect to see in the jump
rope?
Solution
The rope would alternate between having waves with amplitudes two times the original amplitude and reaching
equilibrium with no amplitude at all. The wavelengths will result in both constructive and destructive interference
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Define nodes and antinodes.
Solution
Nodes are areas of wave interference where there is no motion. Antinodes are areas of wave interference where the
motion is at its maximum point.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
You hook up a stereo system. When you test the system, you notice that in one corner of the room, the sounds seem
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 731
16.11 • Energy in Waves: Intensity 713
dull. In another area, the sounds seem excessively loud. Describe how the sound moving about the room could
result in these effects.
Solution
With multiple speakers putting out sounds into the room, and these sounds bouncing off walls, there is bound to be
some wave interference. In the dull areas, the interference is probably mostly destructive. In the louder areas, the
interference is probably mostly constructive.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Wave Interference
Make waves with a dripping faucet, audio speaker, or laser! Add a second source or a pair of slits to create an
interference pattern.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/16-10-superposition-and-
interference)
16.11 Energy in Waves: Intensity
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Calculate the intensity and the power of rays and waves.
FIGURE16.40The destructive effect of an earthquake is palpable evidence of the energy carried in these waves. The Richter scale rating of
earthquakes is related to both their amplitude and the energy they carry. (credit: Petty Officer 2nd Class Candice Villarreal, U.S. Navy)
All waves carry energy. The energy of some waves can be directly observed. Earthquakes can shake whole cities to
the ground, performing the work of thousands of wrecking balls.
Loud sounds pulverize nerve cells in the inner ear, causing permanent hearing loss. Ultrasound is used for deep-heat
treatment of muscle strains. A laser beam can burn away a malignancy. Water waves chew up beaches.
The amount of energy in a wave is related to its amplitude. Large-amplitude earthquakes produce large ground
displacements. Loud sounds have higher pressure amplitudes and come from larger-amplitude source vibrations
than soft sounds. Large ocean breakers churn up the shore more than small ones. More quantitatively, a wave is a
displacement that is resisted by a restoring force. The larger the displacement , the larger the force
needed to create it. Because work is related to force multiplied by distance ( ) and energy is put into the wave
by the work done to create it, the energy in a wave is related to amplitude. In fact, a wave’s energy is directly
proportional to its amplitude squared because
16.74
The energy effects of a wave depend on time as well as amplitude. For example, the longer deep-heat ultrasound is
applied, the more energy it transfers. Waves can also be concentrated or spread out. Sunlight, for example, can be
PAGE: 732
714 16 • Oscillatory Motion and Waves
focused to burn wood. Earthquakes spread out, so they do less damage the farther they get from the source. In both
cases, changing the area the waves cover has important effects. All these pertinent factors are included in the
definition ofintensity as power per unit area:
16.75
where is the power carried by the wave through area . The definition of intensity is valid for any energy in transit,
including that carried by waves. The SI unit for intensity is watts per square meter ( ). For example, infrared
and visible energy from the Sun impinge on Earth at an intensity of just above the atmosphere. There
are other intensity-related units in use, too. The most common is the decibel. For example, a 90 decibel sound level
corresponds to an intensity of . (This quantity is not much power per unit area considering that 90
decibels is a relatively high sound level. Decibels will be discussed in some detail in a later chapter.
EXAMPLE 16.9
Calculating intensity and power: How much energy is in a ray of sunlight?
The average intensity of sunlight on Earth’s surface is about .
(a) Calculate the amount of energy that falls on a solar collector having an area of in .
(b) What intensity would such sunlight have if concentrated by a magnifying glass onto an area 200 times smaller
than its own?
Strategy a
Because power is energy per unit time or , the definition of intensity can be written as , and this
equation can be solved for E with the given information.
Solution a
1. Begin with the equation that states the definition of intensity:
16.76
2. Replace with its equivalent :
16.77
3. Solve for :
16.78
4. Substitute known values into the equation:
16.79
5. Calculate to find and convert units:
16.80
Discussion a
The energy falling on the solar collector in 4 h in part is enough to be useful—for example, for heating a significant
amount of water.
Strategy b
Taking a ratio of new intensity to old intensity and using primes for the new quantities, we will find that it depends
on the ratio of the areas. All other quantities will cancel.
Solution b
1. Take the ratio of intensities, which yields:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 733
16.11 • Energy in Waves: Intensity 715
16.81
2. Identify the knowns:
16.82
16.83
3. Substitute known quantities:
16.84
4. Calculate to find :
16.85
Discussion b
Decreasing the area increases the intensity considerably. The intensity of the concentrated sunlight could even start
a fire.
EXAMPLE 16.10
Determine the combined intensity of two waves: Perfect constructive interference
If two identical waves are spatially separated, each having an intensity of 1.00 W/m2, interfere perfectly
constructively in a particular location, what is the intensity of the wave at this particular location?
Strategy
We know fromSuperposition and Interferencethat when two identical waves, which have equal amplitudes ,
interfere perfectly constructively, the resulting wave has an amplitude of . Because a wave’s intensity is
proportional to amplitude squared, the intensity of the resulting wave is four times as great as in the individual
waves.
Solution
1. Recall that intensity is proportional to amplitude squared.
2. Calculate the new amplitude:
′ ′ 16.86
3. Recall that the intensity of the old amplitude was:
16.87
4. Take the ratio of new intensity to the old intensity. This gives:
′
16.88
5. Calculate to find ′:
′ 16.89
Discussion
The intensity goes up by a factor of 4 when the amplitude doubles. This answer is a little disquieting. The two
individual waves each have intensities of , yet their sum has an intensity of , which may
appear to violate conservation of energy. This violation, of course, cannot happen. What does happen is intriguing.
The area over which the intensity is is much less than the area covered by the two waves before they
interfered. There are other areas where the intensity is zero. The addition of waves is not as simple as our first look
inSuperposition and Interferencesuggested. We actually get a pattern of both constructive interference and
PAGE: 734
716 16 • Oscillatory Motion and Waves
destructive interference whenever two waves are added. For example, if we have two stereo speakers putting out
each, there will be places in the room where the intensity is , other places where the
intensity is zero, and others in between.Figure 16.41shows what this interference might look like. We will pursue
interference patterns elsewhere in this text.
FIGURE16.41These stereo speakers produce both constructive interference and destructive interference in the room, a property common
to the superposition of all types of waves. The shading is proportional to intensity.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Which measurement of a wave is most important when determining the wave's intensity?
Solution
Amplitude, because a wave’s energy is directly proportional to its amplitude squared.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 735
16 • Glossary 717
Glossary
amplitude the maximum displacement from the oscillator causes it to return to equilibrium without
equilibrium position of an object oscillating around oscillating; oscillator moves more slowly toward
the equilibrium position equilibrium than in the critically damped system
antinode the location of maximum amplitude in overtones multiples of the fundamental frequency of
standing waves a sound
beat frequency the frequency of the amplitude period time it takes to complete one oscillation
fluctuations of a wave periodic motion motion that repeats itself at regular
constructive interference when two waves arrive at time intervals
the same point exactly in phase; that is, the crests resonance the phenomenon of driving a system with
of the two waves are precisely aligned, as are the a frequency equal to the system's natural frequency
troughs resonate a system being driven at its natural
critical damping the condition in which the damping frequency
of an oscillator causes it to return as quickly as restoring force force acting in opposition to the force
possible to its equilibrium position without caused by a deformation
oscillating back and forth about this position simple harmonic motion the oscillatory motion in a
deformation displacement from equilibrium system where the net force can be described by
destructive interference when two identical waves Hooke’s law
arrive at the same point exactly out of phase; that is, simple harmonic oscillator a device that implements
precisely aligned crest to trough Hooke’s law, such as a mass that is attached to a
elastic potential energy potential energy stored as a spring, with the other end of the spring being
result of deformation of an elastic object, such as connected to a rigid support such as a wall
the stretching of a spring simple pendulum an object with a small mass
force constant a constant related to the rigidity of a suspended from a light wire or string
system: the larger the force constant, the more rigid superposition the phenomenon that occurs when
the system; the force constant is represented byk two or more waves arrive at the same point
frequency number of events per unit of time transverse wave a wave in which the disturbance is
fundamental frequency the lowest frequency of a perpendicular to the direction of propagation
periodic waveform under damping the condition in which damping of an
intensity power per unit area oscillator causes it to return to equilibrium with the
longitudinal wave a wave in which the disturbance is amplitude gradually decreasing to zero; system
parallel to the direction of propagation returns to equilibrium faster but overshoots and
natural frequency the frequency at which a system crosses the equilibrium position one or more times
would oscillate if there were no driving and no wave a disturbance that moves from its source and
damping forces carries energy
nodes the points where the string does not move; wave velocity the speed at which the disturbance
more generally, nodes are where the wave moves. Also called the propagation velocity or
disturbance is zero in a standing wave propagation speed
oscillate moving back and forth regularly between wavelength the distance between adjacent identical
two points parts of a wave
over damping the condition in which damping of an
Section Summary
16.1Hooke’s Law: Stress and Strain Hooke’s law:
Revisited
where is the restoring force, is the
• An oscillation is a back and forth motion of an
displacement from equilibrium or deformation,
object between two points of deformation.
and is the force constant of the system.
• An oscillation may create a wave, which is a
disturbance that propagates from where it was • Elastic potential energy stored in the
created. deformation of a system that can be described by
• The simplest type of oscillations and waves are Hooke’s law is given by
related to systems that can be described by
PAGE: 736
718 16 • Section Summary
16.2Period and Frequency in Oscillations 16.6Uniform Circular Motion and Simple
Harmonic Motion
• Periodic motion is a repetitious oscillation.
• The time for one oscillation is the period . A projection of uniform circular motion undergoes
• The number of oscillations per unit time is the simple harmonic oscillation.
frequency .
16.7Damped Harmonic Motion
• These quantities are related by
• Damped harmonic oscillators have non-
conservative forces that dissipate their energy.
16.3Simple Harmonic Motion: A Special • Critical damping returns the system to equilibrium
Periodic Motion as fast as possible without overshooting.
• An underdamped system will oscillate through the
• Simple harmonic motion is oscillatory motion for a equilibrium position.
system that can be described only by Hooke’s law. • An overdamped system moves more slowly toward
Such a system is also called a simple harmonic equilibrium than one that is critically damped.
oscillator.
16.8Forced Oscillations and Resonance
• Maximum displacement is the amplitude . The
period and frequency of a simple harmonic
• A system’s natural frequency is the frequency at
oscillator are given by
which the system will oscillate if not affected by
and , where is the driving or damping forces.
• A periodic force driving a harmonic oscillator at its
mass of the system.
natural frequency produces resonance. The
• Displacement in simple harmonic motion as a system is said to resonate.
function of time is given by • The less damping a system has, the higher the
amplitude of the forced oscillations near
• The velocity is given by ,
resonance. The more damping a system has, the
where .
broader response it has to varying driving
• The acceleration is found to be
frequencies.
16.9Waves
16.4The Simple Pendulum
• A wave is a disturbance that moves from the point
• A mass suspended by a wire of length is a of creation with a wave velocity .
simple pendulum and undergoes simple harmonic • A wave has a wavelength , which is the distance
motion for amplitudes less than about between adjacent identical parts of the wave.
The period of a simple pendulum is • Wave velocity and wavelength are related to the
wave’s frequency and period by or
• A transverse wave has a disturbance
where is the length of the string and is the
perpendicular to its direction of propagation,
acceleration due to gravity.
whereas a longitudinal wave has a disturbance
16.5Energy and the Simple Harmonic parallel to its direction of propagation.
Oscillator
16.10Superposition and Interference
• Energy in the simple harmonic oscillator is shared
• Superposition is the combination of two waves at
between elastic potential energy and kinetic
the same location.
energy, with the total being constant:
• Constructive interference occurs when two
identical waves are superimposed in phase.
• Maximum velocity depends on three factors: it is • Destructive interference occurs when two identical
directly proportional to amplitude, it is greater for waves are superimposed exactly out of phase.
stiffer systems, and it is smaller for objects that • A standing wave is one in which two waves
have larger masses: superimpose to produce a wave that varies in
amplitude but does not propagate.
• Nodes are points of no motion in standing waves.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 737
16 • Conceptual Questions 719
• An antinode is the location of maximum amplitude oscillates with a beat frequency given by
of a standing wave.
• Waves on a string are resonant standing waves
16.11Energy in Waves: Intensity
with a fundamental frequency and can occur at
higher multiples of the fundamental, called Intensity is defined to be the power per unit area:
overtones or harmonics.
and has units of .
• Beats occur when waves of similar frequencies
and are superimposed. The resulting amplitude
Conceptual Questions
16.1Hooke’s Law: Stress and Strain 16.5Energy and the Simple Harmonic
Revisited Oscillator
1. Describe a system in which elastic potential energy 9. Explain in terms of energy how dissipative forces
is stored. such as friction reduce the amplitude of a harmonic
oscillator. Also explain how a driving mechanism
16.3Simple Harmonic Motion: A Special can compensate. (A pendulum clock is such a
Periodic Motion system.)
2. What conditions must be met to produce simple
16.7Damped Harmonic Motion
harmonic motion?
3. (a) If frequency is not constant for some oscillation, 10. Give an example of a damped harmonic oscillator.
can the oscillation be simple harmonic motion? (They are more common than undamped or
(b) Can you think of any examples of harmonic simple harmonic oscillators.)
motion where the frequency may depend on the 11. How would a car bounce after a bump under each
amplitude? of these conditions?
4. Give an example of a simple harmonic oscillator, • overdamping
specifically noting how its frequency is independent • underdamping
of amplitude. • critical damping
5. Explain why you expect an object made of a stiff
12. Most harmonic oscillators are damped and, if
material to vibrate at a higher frequency than a
undriven, eventually come to a stop. How is this
similar object made of a spongy material.
observation related to the second law of
6. As you pass a freight truck with a trailer on a
thermodynamics?
highway, you notice that its trailer is bouncing up
and down slowly. Is it more likely that the trailer is
16.8Forced Oscillations and Resonance
heavily loaded or nearly empty? Explain your
answer. 13. Why are soldiers in general ordered to “route
7. Some people modify cars to be much closer to the step” (walk out of step) across a bridge?
ground than when manufactured. Should they
install stiffer springs? Explain your answer. 16.9Waves
14. Give one example of a transverse wave and
16.4The Simple Pendulum
another of a longitudinal wave, being careful to
8. Pendulum clocks are made to run at the correct rate note the relative directions of the disturbance and
by adjusting the pendulum’s length. Suppose you wave propagation in each.
move from one city to another where the 15. What is the difference between propagation speed
acceleration due to gravity is slightly greater, taking and the frequency of a wave? Does one or both
your pendulum clock with you, will you have to affect wavelength? If so, how?
lengthen or shorten the pendulum to keep the
correct time, other factors remaining constant?
Explain your answer.
PAGE: 738
720 16 • Problems & Exercises
16.10Superposition and Interference 16.11Energy in Waves: Intensity
16. Speakers in stereo systems have two color-coded 17. Two identical waves undergo pure constructive
terminals to indicate how to hook up the wires. If interference. Is the resultant intensity twice that
the wires are reversed, the speaker moves in a of the individual waves? Explain your answer.
direction opposite that of a properly connected 18. Circular water waves decrease in amplitude as
speaker. Explain why it is important to have both they move away from where a rock is dropped.
speakers connected the same way. Explain why.
Problems & Exercises
16.1Hooke’s Law: Stress and Strain 16.2Period and Frequency in Oscillations
Revisited
7. What is the period of electrical power?
1. Fish are hung on a spring scale to determine their 8. If your heart rate is 150 beats per minute during
mass (most fishermen feel no obligation to strenuous exercise, what is the time per beat in
truthfully report the mass). units of seconds?
(a) What is the force constant of the spring in such a 9. Find the frequency of a tuning fork that takes
scale if it the spring stretches 8.00 cm for a 10.0 kg to complete one oscillation.
load? 10. A stroboscope is set to flash every .
(b) What is the mass of a fish that stretches the What is the frequency of the flashes?
spring 5.50 cm? 11. A tire has a tread pattern with a crevice every 2.00
(c) How far apart are the half-kilogram marks on the cm. Each crevice makes a single vibration as the
scale? tire moves. What is the frequency of these
2. It is weigh-in time for the local under-85-kg rugby vibrations if the car moves at 30.0 m/s?
team. The bathroom scale used to assess eligibility 12. Engineering Application
can be described by Hooke’s law and is depressed Each piston of an engine makes a sharp sound
0.75 cm by its maximum load of 120 kg. (a) What is every other revolution of the engine. (a) How fast
the spring’s effective spring constant? (b) A player is a race car going if its eight-cylinder engine emits
stands on the scales and depresses it by 0.48 cm. a sound of frequency 750 Hz, given that the
Is he eligible to play on this under-85 kg team? engine makes 2000 revolutions per kilometer? (b)
3. One type of BB gun uses a spring-driven plunger to At how many revolutions per minute is the engine
blow the BB from its barrel. (a) Calculate the force rotating?
constant of its plunger’s spring if you must
compress it 0.150 m to drive the 0.0500-kg plunger 16.3Simple Harmonic Motion: A Special
to a top speed of 20.0 m/s. (b) What force must be Periodic Motion
exerted to compress the spring?
13. A type of cuckoo clock keeps time by having a
4. (a) The springs of a pickup truck act like a single
mass bouncing on a spring, usually something
spring with a force constant of . By
cute like a cherub in a chair. What force constant is
how much will the truck be depressed by its
needed to produce a period of 0.500 s for a
maximum load of 1000 kg?
0.0150-kg mass?
(b) If the pickup truck has four identical springs,
14. If the spring constant of a simple harmonic
what is the force constant of each?
oscillator is doubled, by what factor will the mass
5. When an 80.0-kg man stands on a pogo stick, the
of the system need to change in order for the
spring is compressed 0.120 m.
frequency of the motion to remain the same?
(a) What is the force constant of the spring? (b) Will
15. A 0.500-kg mass suspended from a spring
the spring be compressed more when he hops
oscillates with a period of 1.50 s. How much mass
down the road?
must be added to the object to change the period
6. A spring has a length of 0.200 m when a 0.300-kg
to 2.00 s?
mass hangs from it, and a length of 0.750 m when a
16. By how much leeway (both percentage and mass)
1.95-kg mass hangs from it. (a) What is the force
would you have in the selection of the mass of the
constant of the spring? (b) What is the unloaded
object in the previous problem if you did not wish
length of the spring?
the new period to be greater than 2.01 s or less
than 1.99 s?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 739
16 • Problems & Exercises 721
17. Suppose you attach the object with mass to a 21. A 90.0-kg skydiver hanging from a parachute
vertical spring originally at rest, and let it bounce bounces up and down with a period of 1.50 s.
up and down. You release the object from rest at What is the new period of oscillation when a
the spring’s original rest length. (a) Show that the second skydiver, whose mass is 60.0 kg, hangs
spring exerts an upward force of on the from the legs of the first, as seen inFigure 16.43.
object at its lowest point. (b) If the spring has a
force constant of and a 0.25-kg-mass
object is set in motion as described, find the
amplitude of the oscillations. (c) Find the
maximum velocity.
18. A diver on a diving board is undergoing simple
harmonic motion. Her mass is 55.0 kg and the
period of her motion is 0.800 s. The next diver is a
male whose period of simple harmonic oscillation
is 1.05 s. What is his mass if the mass of the board
is negligible?
19. Suppose a diving board with no one on it bounces
up and down in a simple harmonic motion with a
frequency of 4.00 Hz. The board has an effective FIGURE16.43The oscillations of one skydiver are about to
mass of 10.0 kg. What is the frequency of the be affected by a second skydiver. (credit: U.S. Army,
www.army.mil)
simple harmonic motion of a 75.0-kg diver on the
board?
16.4The Simple Pendulum
As usual, the acceleration due to gravity in these
problems is taken to be ,unless
otherwise specified.
22. What is the length of a pendulum that has a period
of 0.500 s?
23. Some people think a pendulum with a period of
1.00 s can be driven with “mental energy” or
psycho kinetically, because its period is the same
as an average heartbeat. True or not, what is the
length of such a pendulum?
24. What is the period of a 1.00-m-long pendulum?
25. How long does it take a child on a swing to
complete one swing if her center of gravity is 4.00
20. m below the pivot?
FIGURE16.42This child’s toy relies on springs to keep 26. The pendulum on a cuckoo clock is 5.00 cm long.
infants entertained. (credit: By Humboldthead, Flickr) What is its frequency?
The device pictured inFigure 16.42entertains 27. Two parakeets sit on a swing with their combined
infants while keeping them from wandering. The center of mass 10.0 cm below the pivot. At what
child bounces in a harness suspended from a door frequency do they swing?
frame by a spring constant. 28. (a) A pendulum that has a period of 3.00000 s and
(a) If the spring stretches 0.250 m while that is located where the acceleration due to
supporting an 8.0-kg child, what is its spring gravity is is moved to a location where
constant? the acceleration due to gravity is . What
(b) What is the time for one complete bounce of is its new period? (b) Explain why so many digits
this child? (c) What is the child’s maximum are needed in the value for the period, based on
velocity if the amplitude of her bounce is 0.200 m? the relation between the period and the
acceleration due to gravity.
PAGE: 740
722 16 • Problems & Exercises
29. A pendulum with a period of 2.00000 s in one 36. Engineering Application
location is moved to a new Near the top of the Citigroup Center building in
location where the period is now 1.99796 s. What New York City, there is an object with mass of
is the acceleration due to gravity at its new on springs that have adjustable
location? force constants. Its function is to dampen wind-
30. (a) What is the effect on the period of a pendulum driven oscillations of the building by oscillating at
if you double its length? the same frequency as the building is being
(b) What is the effect on the period of a pendulum driven—the driving force is transferred to the
if you decrease its length by 5.00%? object, which oscillates instead of the entire
31. Find the ratio of the new/old periods of a building. (a) What effective force constant should
pendulum if the pendulum were transported from the springs have to make the object oscillate with
Earth to the Moon, where the acceleration due to a period of 2.00 s? (b) What energy is stored in the
gravity is . springs for a 2.00-m displacement from
32. At what rate will a pendulum clock run on the equilibrium?
Moon, where the acceleration due to gravity is
, if it keeps time accurately on Earth? 16.6Uniform Circular Motion and Simple
That is, find the time (in hours) it takes the clock’s Harmonic Motion
hour hand to make one revolution on the Moon.
37. (a)What is the maximum velocity of an 85.0-kg
33. Suppose the length of a clock’s pendulum is
person bouncing on a bathroom scale having a
changed by 1.000%, exactly at noon one day.
force constant of , if the
What time will it read 24.00 hours later, assuming
amplitude of the bounce is 0.200 cm? (b)What is
it the pendulum has kept perfect time before the
the maximum energy stored in the spring?
change? Note that there are two answers, and
38. A novelty clock has a 0.0100-kg mass object
perform the calculation to four-digit precision.
bouncing on a spring that has a force constant of
34. If a pendulum-driven clock gains 5.00 s/day, what
1.25 N/m. What is the maximum velocity of the
fractional change in pendulum length must be
object if the object bounces 3.00 cm above and
made for it to keep perfect time?
below its equilibrium position? (b) How many
joules of kinetic energy does the object have at its
16.5Energy and the Simple Harmonic
maximum velocity?
Oscillator
39. At what positions is the speed of a simple
35. The length of nylon rope from which a mountain harmonic oscillator half its maximum? That is,
climber is suspended has a force constant of what values of give , where is
the amplitude of the motion?
(a) What is the frequency at which he bounces, 40. A ladybug sits 12.0 cm from the center of a
given his mass plus and the mass of his Beatles music album spinning at 33.33 rpm. What
equipment are 90.0 kg? Ignore the change in is the maximum velocity of its shadow on the wall
gravitational potential energy after the cord begins behind the turntable, if illuminated parallel to the
to stretch. record by the parallel rays of the setting Sun?
(b) How much would this rope stretch to break the
climber’s fall if he free-falls 2.00 m before the 16.7Damped Harmonic Motion
rope runs out of slack? Hint: Use conservation of
41. The amplitude of a lightly damped oscillator
energy.
decreases by during each cycle. What
(c) Repeat both parts of this problem in the
percentage of the mechanical energy of the
situation where twice this length of nylon rope is
oscillator is lost in each cycle?
used.
16.8Forced Oscillations and Resonance
42. How much energy must the shock absorbers of a
1200-kg car dissipate in order to damp a bounce
that initially has a velocity of 0.800 m/s at the
equilibrium position? Assume the car returns to its
original vertical position.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 741
16 • Problems & Exercises 723
43. If a car has a suspension system with a force 51. Scouts at a camp shake the rope bridge they have
constant of , how much energy just crossed and observe the wave crests to be
must the car’s shocks remove to dampen an 8.00 m apart. If they shake the bridge twice per
oscillation starting with a maximum displacement second, what is the propagation speed of the
of 0.0750 m? waves?
44. (a) How much will a spring that has a force 52. What is the wavelength of the waves you create in
constant of 40.0 N/m be stretched by an object a swimming pool if you splash your hand at a rate
with a mass of 0.500 kg when hung motionless of 2.00 Hz and the waves propagate at 0.800 m/s?
from the spring? (b) Calculate the decrease in 53. What is the wavelength of an earthquake that
gravitational potential energy of the 0.500-kg shakes you with a frequency of 10.0 Hz and gets
object when it descends this distance. (c) Part of to another city 84.0 km away in 12.0 s?
this gravitational energy goes into the spring. 54. Radio waves transmitted through space at
Calculate the energy stored in the spring by this by the Voyager spacecraft have a
stretch, and compare it with the gravitational wavelength of 0.120 m. What is their frequency?
potential energy. Explain where the rest of the 55. Your ear is capable of differentiating sounds that
energy might go. arrive at the ear just 1.00 ms apart. What is the
45. Suppose you have a 0.750-kg object on a minimum distance between two speakers that
horizontal surface connected to a spring that has a produce sounds that arrive at noticeably different
force constant of 150 N/m. There is simple friction times on a day when the speed of sound is 340 m/
between the object and surface with a static s?
coefficient of friction . (a) How far can 56. (a) Seismographs measure the arrival times of
the spring be stretched without moving the mass? earthquakes with a precision of 0.100 s. To get the
(b) If the object is set into oscillation with an distance to the epicenter of the quake, they
amplitude twice the distance found in part (a), and compare the arrival times of S- and P-waves,
the kinetic coefficient of friction is , which travel at different speeds.Figure 16.44) If
what total distance does it travel before stopping? S- and P-waves travel at 4.00 and 7.20 km/s,
Assume it starts at the maximum amplitude. respectively, in the region considered, how
46. Engineering Application: A suspension bridge precisely can the distance to the source of the
oscillates with an effective force constant of earthquake be determined? (b) Seismic waves
. (a) How much energy is needed from underground detonations of nuclear bombs
to make it oscillate with an amplitude of 0.100 m? can be used to locate the test site and detect
(b) If soldiers march across the bridge with a violations of test bans. Discuss whether your
cadence equal to the bridge’s natural frequency answer to (a) implies a serious limit to such
and impart of energy each second, detection. (Note also that the uncertainty is
how long does it take for the bridge’s oscillations greater if there is an uncertainty in the
to go from 0.100 m to 0.500 m amplitude? propagation speeds of the S- and P-waves.)
16.9Waves
47. Storms in the South Pacific can create waves that
travel all the way to the California coast, which are
12,000 km away. How long does it take them if
they travel at 15.0 m/s?
48. Waves on a swimming pool propagate at 0.750 m/
s. You splash the water at one end of the pool and
observe the wave go to the opposite end, reflect,
and return in 30.0 s. How far away is the other end
of the pool?
49. Wind gusts create ripples on the ocean that have a
wavelength of 5.00 cm and propagate at 2.00 m/s.
What is their frequency?
50. How many times a minute does a boat bob up and
down on ocean waves that have a wavelength of FIGURE16.44A seismograph as described in above
problem.(credit: Oleg Alexandrov)
40.0 m and a propagation speed of 5.00 m/s?
PAGE: 742
724 16 • Problems & Exercises
16.10Superposition and Interference 66. Engineering Application
A device called an insolation meter is used to
57. A car has two horns, one emitting a frequency of
measure the intensity of sunlight has an area of
199 Hz and the other emitting a frequency of 203
100 cm2and registers 6.50 W. What is the
Hz. What beat frequency do they produce?
intensity in ?
58. The middle-C hammer of a piano hits two strings,
67. Astronomy Application
producing beats of 1.50 Hz. One of the strings is
Energy from the Sun arrives at the top of the
tuned to 260.00 Hz. What frequencies could the
Earth’s atmosphere with an intensity of
other string have?
How long does it take for
59. Two tuning forks having frequencies of 460 and
to arrive on an area of ?
464 Hz are struck simultaneously. What average
68. Suppose you have a device that extracts energy
frequency will you hear, and what will the beat
from ocean breakers in direct proportion to their
frequency be?
intensity. If the device produces 10.0 kW of power
60. Twin jet engines on an airplane are producing an
on a day when the breakers are 1.20 m high, how
average sound frequency of 4100 Hz with a beat
much will it produce when they are 0.600 m high?
frequency of 0.500 Hz. What are their individual
69. Engineering Application
frequencies?
(a) A photovoltaic array of (solar cells) is 10.0%
61. A wave traveling on a Slinky® that is stretched to 4
efficient in gathering solar energy and converting it
m takes 2.4 s to travel the length of the Slinky and
to electricity. If the average intensity of sunlight on
back again. (a) What is the speed of the wave? (b)
one day is what area should your array
Using the same Slinky stretched to the same
have to gather energy at the rate of 100 W? (b)
length, a standing wave is created which consists
What is the maximum cost of the array if it must
of three antinodes and four nodes. At what
pay for itself in two years of operation averaging
frequency must the Slinky be oscillating?
10.0 hours per day? Assume that it earns money
62. Three adjacent keys on a piano (F, F-sharp, and G)
at the rate of 9.00 ¢ per kilowatt-hour.
are struck simultaneously, producing frequencies
70. A microphone receiving a pure sound tone feeds
of 349, 370, and 392 Hz. What beat frequencies
an oscilloscope, producing a wave on its screen. If
are produced by this discordant combination?
the sound intensity is originally
but is turned up until the
16.11Energy in Waves: Intensity
amplitude increases by 30.0%, what is the new
63. Medical Application intensity?
Ultrasound of intensity is 71. Medical Application
produced by the rectangular head of a medical (a) What is the intensity in of a laser beam
imaging device measuring 3.00 by 5.00 cm. What used to burn away cancerous tissue that, when
is its power output? 90.0% absorbed, puts 500 J of energy into a
64. The low-frequency speaker of a stereo set has a circular spot 2.00 mm in diameter in 4.00 s? (b)
surface area of and produces 1W of Discuss how this intensity compares to the
acoustical power. What is the intensity at the average intensity of sunlight (about )
speaker? If the speaker projects sound uniformly and the implications that would have if the laser
in all directions, at what distance from the speaker beam entered your eye. Note how the amount of
is the intensity ? damage depends on the time duration of the
65. To increase intensity of a wave by a factor of 50, exposure.
by what factor should the amplitude be increased?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 743
CHAPTER 17
Physics of Hearing
FIGURE17.1This tree fell some time ago. When it fell, atoms in the air were disturbed. Physicists would call this disturbance sound
whether someone was around to hear it or not. (credit: B.A. Bowen Photography)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
17.1Sound
17.2Speed of Sound, Frequency, and Wavelength
17.3Sound Intensity and Sound Level
17.4Doppler Effect and Sonic Booms
17.5Sound Interference and Resonance: Standing Waves in Air Columns
17.6Hearing
17.7Ultrasound
INTRODUCTION TO THE PHYSICS OF HEARING If a tree falls in the forest and no one is there to hear it, does it
make a sound? The answer to this old philosophical question depends on how you define sound. If sound only exists
when someone is around to perceive it, then there was no sound. However, if we define sound in terms of physics;
that is, a disturbance of the atoms in matter transmitted from its origin outward (in other words, a wave), then there
wasa sound, even if nobody was around to hear it.
Such a wave is the physical phenomenon we callsound.Its perception is hearing. Both the physical phenomenon
and its perception are interesting and will be considered in this text. We shall explore both sound and hearing; they
are related, but are not the same thing. We will also explore the many practical uses of sound waves, such as in
medical imaging.
PAGE: 744
726 17 • Physics of Hearing
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/17-introduction-to-the-physics-of-
hearing)
17.1 Sound
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define sound and hearing.
• Describe sound as a longitudinal wave.
FIGURE17.2This glass has been shattered by a high-intensity sound wave of the same frequency as the resonant frequency of the glass.
While the sound is not visible, the effects of the sound prove its existence. (credit: ||read||, Flickr)
Sound can be used as a familiar illustration of waves. Because hearing is one of our most important senses, it is
interesting to see how the physical properties of sound correspond to our perceptions of it.Hearingis the
perception of sound, just as vision is the perception of visible light. But sound has important applications beyond
hearing. Ultrasound, for example, is not heard but can be employed to form medical images and is also used in
treatment.
The physical phenomenon ofsoundis defined to be a disturbance of matter that is transmitted from its source
outward. Sound is a wave. On the atomic scale, it is a disturbance of atoms that is far more ordered than their
thermal motions. In many instances, sound is a periodic wave, and the atoms undergo simple harmonic motion. In
this text, we shall explore such periodic sound waves.
A vibrating string produces a sound wave as illustrated inFigure 17.3,Figure 17.4, andFigure 17.5. As the string
oscillates back and forth, it transfers energy to the air, mostly as thermal energy created by turbulence. But a small
part of the string’s energy goes into compressing and expanding the surrounding air, creating slightly higher and
lower local pressures. These compressions (high pressure regions) and rarefactions (low pressure regions) move out
as longitudinal pressure waves having the same frequency as the string—they are the disturbance that is a sound
wave. (Sound waves in air and most fluids are longitudinal, because fluids have almost no shear strength. In solids,
sound waves can be both transverse and longitudinal.)Figure 17.5shows a graph of gauge pressure versus distance
from the vibrating string.
FIGURE17.3A vibrating string moving to the right compresses the air in front of it and expands the air behind it.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 745
17.1 • Sound 727
FIGURE17.4As the string moves to the left, it creates another compression and rarefaction as the ones on the right move away from the
string.
FIGURE17.5After many vibrations, there are a series of compressions and rarefactions moving out from the string as a sound wave. The
graph shows gauge pressure versus distance from the source. Pressures vary only slightly from atmospheric for ordinary sounds.
The amplitude of a sound wave decreases with distance from its source, because the energy of the wave is spread
over a larger and larger area. But it is also absorbed by objects, such as the eardrum inFigure 17.6, and converted to
thermal energy by the viscosity of air. In addition, during each compression a little heat transfers to the air and
during each rarefaction even less heat transfers from the air, so that the heat transfer reduces the organized
disturbance into random thermal motions. (These processes can be viewed as a manifestation of the second law of
thermodynamics presented inIntroduction to the Second Law of Thermodynamics: Heat Engines and Their
Efficiency.) Whether the heat transfer from compression to rarefaction is significant depends on how far apart they
are—that is, it depends on wavelength. Wavelength, frequency, amplitude, and speed of propagation are important
for sound, as they are for all waves.
FIGURE17.6Sound wave compressions and rarefactions travel up the ear canal and force the eardrum to vibrate. There is a net force on
the eardrum, since the sound wave pressures differ from the atmospheric pressure found behind the eardrum. A complicated mechanism
converts the vibrations to nerve impulses, which are perceived by the person.
PAGE: 746
728 17 • Physics of Hearing
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Wave Interference
Make waves with a dripping faucet, audio speaker, or laser! Add a second source or a pair of slits to create an
interference pattern.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/17-1-sound)
17.2 Speed of Sound, Frequency, and Wavelength
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define pitch.
• Describe the relationship between the speed of sound, its frequency, and its wavelength.
• Describe the effects on the speed of sound as it travels through various media.
• Describe the effects of temperature on the speed of sound.
FIGURE17.7When a firework explodes, the light energy is perceived before the sound energy. Sound travels more slowly than light does.
(credit: Dominic Alves, Flickr)
Sound, like all waves, travels at a certain speed and has the properties of frequency and wavelength. You can
observe direct evidence of the speed of sound while watching a fireworks display. The flash of an explosion is seen
well before its sound is heard, implying both that sound travels at a finite speed and that it is much slower than light.
You can also directly sense the frequency of a sound. Perception of frequency is calledpitch. The wavelength of
sound is not directly sensed, but indirect evidence is found in the correlation of the size of musical instruments with
their pitch. Small instruments, such as a piccolo, typically make high-pitch sounds, while large instruments, such as
a tuba, typically make low-pitch sounds. High pitch means small wavelength, and the size of a musical instrument is
directly related to the wavelengths of sound it produces. So a small instrument creates short-wavelength sounds.
Similar arguments hold that a large instrument creates long-wavelength sounds.
The relationship of the speed of sound, its frequency, and wavelength is the same as for all waves:
17.1
where is the speed of sound, is its frequency, and is its wavelength. The wavelength of a sound is the
distance between adjacent identical parts of a wave—for example, between adjacent compressions as illustrated in
Figure 17.8. The frequency is the same as that of the source and is the number of waves that pass a point per unit
time.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 747
17.2 • Speed of Sound, Frequency, and Wavelength 729
FIGURE17.8A sound wave emanates from a source vibrating at a frequency , propagates at , and has a wavelength .
Table 17.1makes it apparent that the speed of sound varies greatly in different media. The speed of sound in a
medium is determined by a combination of the medium’s rigidity (or compressibility in gases) and its density. The
more rigid (or less compressible) the medium, the faster the speed of sound. For materials that have similar
rigidities, sound will travel faster through the one with the lower density because the sound energy is more easily
transferred from particle to particle. The speed of sound in air is low, because air is compressible. Because liquids
and solids are relatively rigid and very difficult to compress, the speed of sound in such media is generally greater
than in gases.
Medium v (m/s)
w
Gases at
Air 331
Carbon dioxide 259
Oxygen 316
Helium 965
Hydrogen 1290
Liquids at
Ethanol 1160
Mercury 1450
Water, fresh 1480
Sea water 1540
Human tissue 1540
Solids (longitudinal or bulk)
Vulcanized rubber 54
TABLE17.1Speed of Sound in
Various Media
PAGE: 748
730 17 • Physics of Hearing
Medium v (m/s)
w
Polyethylene 920
Marble 3810
Glass, Pyrex 5640
Lead 1960
Aluminum 5120
Steel 5960
TABLE17.1Speed of Sound in
Various Media
Earthquakes, essentially sound waves in Earth’s crust, are an interesting example of how the speed of sound
depends on the rigidity of the medium. Earthquakes have both longitudinal and transverse components, and these
travel at different speeds. The bulk modulus of granite is greater than its shear modulus. For that reason, the speed
of longitudinal or pressure waves (P-waves) in earthquakes in granite is significantly higher than the speed of
transverse or shear waves (S-waves). Both components of earthquakes travel slower in less rigid material, such as
sediments. P-waves have speeds of 4 to 7 km/s, and S-waves correspondingly range in speed from 2 to 5 km/s, both
being faster in more rigid material. The P-wave gets progressively farther ahead of the S-wave as they travel through
Earth’s crust. The time between the P- and S-waves is routinely used to determine the distance to their source, the
epicenter of the earthquake. The time and nature of these wave differences also provides the evidence for the
nature of Earth's core. Through careful analysis of seismographic records of large earthquakes whose waves could
be clearly detected around the world, Richard Dixon Oldham established that waves passing through the center of
the Earth behaved as if they were moving through a different medium: a liquid. Later on, Inge Lehmann used more
precise observations (partly based on a better coordinated network of seismographs she helped set up) to better
define the nature of the core: that it was a solid inner core surrounded by a liquid outer core.
The speed of sound is affected by temperature in a given medium. For air at sea level, the speed of sound is given by
17.2
where the temperature (denoted as ) is in units of kelvin. The speed of sound in gases is related to the average
speed of particles in the gas, , and that
17.3
where is the Boltzmann constant ( ) and is the mass of each (identical) particle in the gas. So, it
is reasonable that the speed of sound in air and other gases should depend on the square root of temperature. While
not negligible, this is not a strong dependence. At , the speed of sound is 331 m/s, whereas at it is 343
m/s, less than a 4% increase.Figure 17.9shows a use of the speed of sound by a bat to sense distances. Echoes are
also used in medical imaging.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 749
17.2 • Speed of Sound, Frequency, and Wavelength 731
FIGURE17.9A bat uses sound echoes to find its way about and to catch prey. The time for the echo to return is directly proportional to the
distance.
One of the more important properties of sound is that its speed is nearly independent of frequency. This
independence is certainly true in open air for sounds in the audible range of 20 to 20,000 Hz. If this independence
were not true, you would certainly notice it for music played by a marching band in a football stadium, for example.
Suppose that high-frequency sounds traveled faster—then the farther you were from the band, the more the sound
from the low-pitch instruments would lag that from the high-pitch ones. But the music from all instruments arrives
in cadence independent of distance, and so all frequencies must travel at nearly the same speed. Recall that
17.4
In a given medium under fixed conditions, is constant, so that there is a relationship between and ; the higher
the frequency, the smaller the wavelength. SeeFigure 17.10and consider the following example.
FIGURE17.10Because they travel at the same speed in a given medium, low-frequency sounds must have a greater wavelength than high-
frequency sounds. Here, the lower-frequency sounds are emitted by the large speaker, called a woofer, while the higher-frequency sounds
are emitted by the small speaker, called a tweeter.
EXAMPLE 17.1
Calculating Wavelengths: What Are the Wavelengths of Audible Sounds?
Calculate the wavelengths of sounds at the extremes of the audible range, 20 and 20,000 Hz, in air. (Assume
that the frequency values are accurate to two significant figures.)
Strategy
To find wavelength from frequency, we can use .
Solution
1. Identify knowns. The value for , is given by
17.5
2. Convert the temperature into kelvin and then enter the temperature into the equation
17.6
PAGE: 750
732 17 • Physics of Hearing
3. Solve the relationship between speed and wavelength for :
17.7
4. Enter the speed and the minimum frequency to give the maximum wavelength:
17.8
5. Enter the speed and the maximum frequency to give the minimum wavelength:
17.9
Discussion
Because the product of multiplied by equals a constant, the smaller is, the larger must be, and vice versa.
The speed of sound can change when sound travels from one medium to another. However, the frequency usually
remains the same because it is like a driven oscillation and has the frequency of the original source. If changes
and remains the same, then the wavelength must change. That is, because , the higher the speed of a
sound, the greater its wavelength for a given frequency.
Making Connections: Take-Home Investigation—Voice as a Sound Wave
Suspend a sheet of paper so that the top edge of the paper is fixed and the bottom edge is free to move. You
could tape the top edge of the paper to the edge of a table. Gently blow near the edge of the bottom of the sheet
and note how the sheet moves. Speak softly and then louder such that the sounds hit the edge of the bottom of
the paper, and note how the sheet moves. Explain the effects.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Imagine you observe two fireworks explode. You hear the explosion of one as soon as you see it. However, you see
the other firework for several milliseconds before you hear the explosion. Explain why this is so.
Solution
Sound and light both travel at definite speeds. The speed of sound is slower than the speed of light. The first
firework is probably very close by, so the speed difference is not noticeable. The second firework is farther away, so
the light arrives at your eyes noticeably sooner than the sound wave arrives at your ears.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
You observe two musical instruments that you cannot identify. One plays high-pitch sounds and the other plays low-
pitch sounds. How could you determine which is which without hearing either of them play?
Solution
Compare their sizes. High-pitch instruments are generally smaller than low-pitch instruments because they
generate a smaller wavelength.
17.3 Sound Intensity and Sound Level
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define intensity, sound intensity, and sound pressure level.
• Calculate sound intensity levels in decibels (dB).
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 751
17.3 • Sound Intensity and Sound Level 733
FIGURE17.11Noise on crowded roadways like this one in Delhi makes it hard to hear others unless they shout. (credit: Lingaraj G J, Flickr)
In a quiet forest, you can sometimes hear a single leaf fall to the ground. After settling into bed, you may hear your
blood pulsing through your ears. But when a passing motorist has his stereo turned up, you cannot even hear what
the person next to you in your car is saying. We are all very familiar with the loudness of sounds and aware that they
are related to how energetically the source is vibrating. In cartoons depicting a screaming person (or an animal
making a loud noise), the cartoonist often shows an open mouth with a vibrating uvula, the hanging tissue at the
back of the mouth, to suggest a loud sound coming from the throatFigure 17.12. High noise exposure is hazardous
to hearing, and it is common for musicians to have hearing losses that are sufficiently severe that they interfere with
the musicians’ abilities to perform. The relevant physical quantity is sound intensity, a concept that is valid for all
sounds whether or not they are in the audible range.
Intensity is defined to be the power per unit area carried by a wave. Power is the rate at which energy is transferred
by the wave. In equation form,intensity is
17.10
where is the power through an area . The SI unit for is . The intensity of a sound wave is related to its
amplitude squared by the following relationship:
17.11
Here is the pressure variation or pressure amplitude (half the difference between the maximum and minimum
pressure in the sound wave) in units of pascals (Pa) or . (We are using a lower case for pressure to
distinguish it from power, denoted by above.) The energy (as kinetic energy ) of an oscillating element of air
due to a traveling sound wave is proportional to its amplitude squared. In this equation, is the density of the
material in which the sound wave travels, in units of , and is the speed of sound in the medium, in units of
m/s. The pressure variation is proportional to the amplitude of the oscillation, and so varies as (Figure
17.12). This relationship is consistent with the fact that the sound wave is produced by some vibration; the greater
its pressure amplitude, the more the air is compressed in the sound it creates.
PAGE: 752
734 17 • Physics of Hearing
FIGURE17.12Graphs of the gauge pressures in two sound waves of different intensities. The more intense sound is produced by a source
that has larger-amplitude oscillations and has greater pressure maxima and minima. Because pressures are higher in the greater-intensity
sound, it can exert larger forces on the objects it encounters.
Sound intensity levels are quoted in decibels (dB) much more often than sound intensities in watts per meter
squared. Decibels are the unit of choice in the scientific literature as well as in the popular media. The reasons for
this choice of units are related to how we perceive sounds. How our ears perceive sound can be more accurately
described by the logarithm of the intensity rather than directly to the intensity. Thesound intensity level in
decibels of a sound having an intensity in watts per meter squared is defined to be
17.12
where is a reference intensity. In particular, is the lowest or threshold intensity of sound a
person with normal hearing can perceive at a frequency of 1000 Hz. Sound intensity level is not the same as
intensity. Because is defined in terms of a ratio, it is a unitless quantity telling you thelevelof the sound relative to
a fixed standard ( , in this case). The units of decibels (dB) are used to indicate this ratio is multiplied by
10 in its definition. The bel, upon which the decibel is based, is named for Alexander Graham Bell, the inventor of
the telephone.
Sound intensity levelβ Intensity
Example/effect
(dB) I(W/m2)
Threshold of hearing at 1000 Hz
Rustle of leaves
Whisper at 1 m distance
Quiet home
Average home
Average office, soft music
Normal conversation
Noisy office, busy traffic
Loud radio, classroom lecture
TABLE17.2Sound Intensity Levels and Intensities
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 753
17.3 • Sound Intensity and Sound Level 735
Sound intensity levelβ Intensity
Example/effect
(dB) I(W/m2)
1
Inside a heavy truck; damage from prolonged exposure
Noisy factory, siren at 30 m; damage from 8 h per day
exposure
Damage from 30 min per day exposure
Loud rock concert, pneumatic chipper at 2 m; threshold of
pain
Jet airplane at 30 m; severe pain, damage in seconds
Bursting of eardrums
TABLE17.2Sound Intensity Levels and Intensities
The decibel level of a sound having the threshold intensity of is , because . That
is, the threshold of hearing is 0 decibels.Table 17.2gives levels in decibels and intensities in watts per meter
squared for some familiar sounds.
One of the more striking things about the intensities inTable 17.2is that the intensity in watts per meter squared is
quite small for most sounds. The ear is sensitive to as little as a trillionth of a watt per meter squared—even more
impressive when you realize that the area of the eardrum is only about , so that only W falls on it at the
threshold of hearing! Air molecules in a sound wave of this intensity vibrate over a distance of less than one
molecular diameter, and the gauge pressures involved are less than atm.
Another impressive feature of the sounds inTable 17.2is their numerical range. Sound intensity varies by a factor of
from threshold to a sound that causes damage in seconds. You are unaware of this tremendous range in sound
intensity because how your ears respond can be described approximately as the logarithm of intensity. Thus, sound
intensity levels in decibels fit your experience better than intensities in watts per meter squared. The decibel scale
is also easier to relate to because most people are more accustomed to dealing with numbers such as 0, 53, or 120
than numbers such as .
One more observation readily verified by examiningTable 17.2or using is that each factor of 10 in
intensity corresponds to 10 dB. For example, a 90 dB sound compared with a 60 dB sound is 30 dB greater, or three
factors of 10 (that is, times) as intense. Another example is that if one sound is as intense as another, it is
70 dB higher. SeeTable 17.3.
1 Several government agencies and health-related professional associations recommend that 85 dB not be exceeded for 8-hour daily
exposures in the absence of hearing protection.
PAGE: 754
736 17 • Physics of Hearing
2.0 3.0 dB
5.0 7.0 dB
10.0 10.0 dB
TABLE17.3Ratios
of Intensities and
Corresponding
Differences in
Sound Intensity
Levels
EXAMPLE 17.2
Calculating Sound Intensity Levels: Sound Waves
Calculate the sound intensity level in decibels for a sound wave traveling in air at and having a pressure
amplitude of 0.656 Pa.
Strategy
We are given , so we can calculate using the equation . Using , we can calculate straight
from its definition in .
Solution
(1) Identify knowns:
Sound travels at 331 m/s in air at .
Air has a density of at atmospheric pressure and .
(2) Enter these values and the pressure amplitude into :
17.13
(3) Enter the value for and the known value for into . Calculate to find the sound
intensity level in decibels:
17.14
Discussion
This 87 dB sound has an intensity five times as great as an 80 dB sound. So a factor of five in intensity corresponds
to a difference of 7 dB in sound intensity level. This value is true for any intensities differing by a factor of five.
EXAMPLE 17.3
Change Intensity Levels of a Sound: What Happens to the Decibel Level?
Show that if one sound is twice as intense as another, it has a sound level about 3 dB higher.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 755
17.3 • Sound Intensity and Sound Level 737
Strategy
You are given that the ratio of two intensities is 2 to 1, and are then asked to find the difference in their sound levels
in decibels. You can solve this problem using of the properties of logarithms.
Solution
(1) Identify knowns:
The ratio of the two intensities is 2 to 1, or:
17.15
We wish to show that the difference in sound levels is about 3 dB. That is, we want to show:
17.16
Note that:
17.17
(2) Use the definition of to get:
17.18
Thus,
17.19
Discussion
This means that the two sound intensity levels differ by 3.01 dB, or about 3 dB, as advertised. Note that because
only the ratio is given (and not the actual intensities), this result is true for any intensities that differ by a
factor of two. For example, a 56.0 dB sound is twice as intense as a 53.0 dB sound, a 97.0 dB sound is half as
intense as a 100 dB sound, and so on.
It should be noted at this point that there is another decibel scale in use, called thesound pressure level, based on
the ratio of the pressure amplitude to a reference pressure. This scale is used particularly in applications where
sound travels in water. It is beyond the scope of most introductory texts to treat this scale because it is not
commonly used for sounds in air, but it is important to note that very different decibel levels may be encountered
when sound pressure levels are quoted. For example, ocean noise pollution produced by ships may be as great as
200 dB expressed in the sound pressure level, where the more familiar sound intensity level we use here would be
something under 140 dB for the same sound.
Take-Home Investigation: Feeling Sound
Find a CD player and a CD that has rock music. Place the player on a light table, insert the CD into the player, and
start playing the CD. Place your hand gently on the table next to the speakers. Increase the volume and note the
level when the table just begins to vibrate as the rock music plays. Increase the reading on the volume control
until it doubles. What has happened to the vibrations?
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Describe how amplitude is related to the loudness of a sound.
Solution
Amplitude is directly proportional to the experience of loudness. As amplitude increases, loudness increases.
PAGE: 756
738 17 • Physics of Hearing
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Identify common sounds at the levels of 10 dB, 50 dB, and 100 dB.
Solution
10 dB: Running fingers through your hair.
50 dB: Inside a quiet home with no television or radio.
100 dB: Take-off of a jet plane.
17.4 Doppler Effect and Sonic Booms
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define Doppler effect, Doppler shift, and sonic boom.
• Calculate the frequency of a sound heard by someone observing Doppler shift.
• Describe the sounds produced by objects moving faster than the speed of sound.
The characteristic sound of a motorcycle buzzing by is an example of theDoppler effect. The high-pitch scream
shifts dramatically to a lower-pitch roar as the motorcycle passes by a stationary observer. The closer the
motorcycle brushes by, the more abrupt the shift. The faster the motorcycle moves, the greater the shift. We also
hear this characteristic shift in frequency for passing race cars, airplanes, and trains. It is so familiar that it is used to
imply motion and children often mimic it in play.
The Doppler effect is an alteration in the observed frequency of a sound due to motion of either the source or the
observer. Although less familiar, this effect is easily noticed for a stationary source and moving observer. For
example, if you ride a train past a stationary warning bell, you will hear the bell’s frequency shift from high to low as
you pass by. The actual change in frequency due to relative motion of source and observer is called aDoppler shift.
The Doppler effect and Doppler shift are named for the Austrian physicist and mathematician Christian Johann
Doppler (1803–1853), who did experiments with both moving sources and moving observers. Doppler, for example,
had musicians play on a moving open train car and also play standing next to the train tracks as a train passed by.
Their music was observed both on and off the train, and changes in frequency were measured.
What causes the Doppler shift?Figure 17.13,Figure 17.14, andFigure 17.15compare sound waves emitted by
stationary and moving sources in a stationary air mass. Each disturbance spreads out spherically from the point
where the sound was emitted. If the source is stationary, then all of the spheres representing the air compressions
in the sound wave centered on the same point, and the stationary observers on either side see the same wavelength
and frequency as emitted by the source, as inFigure 17.13. If the source is moving, as inFigure 17.14, then the
situation is different. Each compression of the air moves out in a sphere from the point where it was emitted, but the
point of emission moves. This moving emission point causes the air compressions to be closer together on one side
and farther apart on the other. Thus, the wavelength is shorter in the direction the source is moving (on the right in
Figure 17.14), and longer in the opposite direction (on the left inFigure 17.14). Finally, if the observers move, as in
Figure 17.15, the frequency at which they receive the compressions changes. The observer moving toward the
source receives them at a higher frequency, and the person moving away from the source receives them at a lower
frequency.
FIGURE17.13Sounds emitted by a source spread out in spherical waves. Because the source, observers, and air are stationary, the
wavelength and frequency are the same in all directions and to all observers.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 757
17.4 • Doppler Effect and Sonic Booms 739
FIGURE17.14Sounds emitted by a source moving to the right spread out from the points at which they were emitted. The wavelength is
reduced and, consequently, the frequency is increased in the direction of motion, so that the observer on the right hears a higher-pitch
sound. The opposite is true for the observer on the left, where the wavelength is increased and the frequency is reduced.
FIGURE17.15The same effect is produced when the observers move relative to the source. Motion toward the source increases frequency
as the observer on the right passes through more wave crests than she would if stationary. Motion away from the source decreases
frequency as the observer on the left passes through fewer wave crests than he would if stationary.
We know that wavelength and frequency are related by , where is the fixed speed of sound. The sound
moves in a medium and has the same speed in that medium whether the source is moving or not. Thus
multiplied by is a constant. Because the observer on the right inFigure 17.14receives a shorter wavelength, the
frequency she receives must be higher. Similarly, the observer on the left receives a longer wavelength, and hence
he hears a lower frequency. The same thing happens inFigure 17.15. A higher frequency is received by the observer
moving toward the source, and a lower frequency is received by an observer moving away from the source. In
general, then, relative motion of source and observer toward one another increases the received frequency. Relative
motion apart decreases frequency. The greater the relative speed is, the greater the effect.
The Doppler Effect
The Doppler effect occurs not only for sound but for any wave when there is relative motion between the
observer and the source. There are Doppler shifts in the frequency of sound, light, and water waves, for
example. Doppler shifts can be used to determine velocity, such as when ultrasound is reflected from blood in a
medical diagnostic. The recession of galaxies is determined by the shift in the frequencies of light received from
them and has implied much about the origins of the universe. Modern physics has been profoundly affected by
observations of Doppler shifts.
For a stationary observer and a moving source, the frequencyf received by the observer can be shown to be
obs
17.20
where is the frequency of the source, is the speed of the source along a line joining the source and observer,
and is the speed of sound. The minus sign is used for motion toward the observer and the plus sign for motion
away from the observer, producing the appropriate shifts up and down in frequency. Note that the greater the speed
of the source, the greater the effect. Similarly, for a stationary source and moving observer, the frequency received
by the observer is given by
PAGE: 758
740 17 • Physics of Hearing
17.21
where is the speed of the observer along a line joining the source and observer. Here the plus sign is for motion
toward the source, and the minus is for motion away from the source.
EXAMPLE 17.4
Calculate Doppler Shift: A Train Horn
Suppose a train that has a 150-Hz horn is moving at 35.0 m/s in still air on a day when the speed of sound is 340 m/
s.
(a) What frequencies are observed by a stationary person at the side of the tracks as the train approaches and after
it passes?
(b) What frequency is observed by the train’s engineer traveling on the train?
Strategy
To find the observed frequency in (a), must be used because the source is moving. The minus
sign is used for the approaching train, and the plus sign for the receding train. In (b), there are two Doppler
shifts—one for a moving source and the other for a moving observer.
Solution for (a)
(1) Enter known values into
17.22
(2) Calculate the frequency observed by a stationary person as the train approaches.
17.23
(3) Use the same equation with the plus sign to find the frequency heard by a stationary person as the train recedes.
17.24
(4) Calculate the second frequency.
17.25
Discussion on (a)
The numbers calculated are valid when the train is far enough away that the motion is nearly along the line joining
train and observer. In both cases, the shift is significant and easily noticed. Note that the shift is 17.0 Hz for motion
toward and 14.0 Hz for motion away. The shifts are not symmetric.
Solution for (b)
(1) Identify knowns:
• It seems reasonable that the engineer would receive the same frequency as emitted by the horn, because the
relative velocity between them is zero.
• Relative to the medium (air), the speeds are
• The first Doppler shift is for the moving observer; the second is for the moving source.
(2) Use the following equation:
17.26
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 759
17.4 • Doppler Effect and Sonic Booms 741
The quantity in the square brackets is the Doppler-shifted frequency due to a moving observer. The factor on the
right is the effect of the moving source.
(3) Because the train engineer is moving in the direction toward the horn, we must use the plus sign for
however, because the horn is also moving in the direction away from the engineer, we also use the plus sign for .
But the train is carrying both the engineer and the horn at the same velocity, so . As a result, everything
but cancels, yielding
17.27
Discussion for (b)
We may expect that there is no change in frequency when source and observer move together because it fits your
experience. For example, there is no Doppler shift in the frequency of conversations between driver and passenger
on a motorcycle. People talking when a wind moves the air between them also observe no Doppler shift in their
conversation. The crucial point is that source and observer are not moving relative to each other.
Sonic Booms to Bow Wakes
What happens to the sound produced by a moving source, such as a jet airplane, that approaches or even exceeds
the speed of sound? The answer to this question applies not only to sound but to all other waves as well.
Suppose a jet airplane is coming nearly straight at you, emitting a sound of frequency . The greater the plane’s
speed , the greater the Doppler shift and the greater the value observed for . Now, as approaches the
speed of sound, approaches infinity, because the denominator in approaches zero. At the
speed of sound, this result means that in front of the source, each successive wave is superimposed on the previous
one because the source moves forward at the speed of sound. The observer gets them all at the same instant, and
so the frequency is infinite. (Before airplanes exceeded the speed of sound, some people argued it would be
impossible because such constructive superposition would produce pressures great enough to destroy the
airplane.) If the source exceeds the speed of sound, no sound is received by the observer until the source has
passed, so that the sounds from the approaching source are mixed with those from it when receding. This mixing
appears messy, but something interesting happens—a sonic boom is created. (SeeFigure 17.16.)
FIGURE17.16Sound waves from a source that moves faster than the speed of sound spread spherically from the point where they are
emitted, but the source moves ahead of each. Constructive interference along the lines shown (actually a cone in three dimensions) creates
a shock wave called a sonic boom. The faster the speed of the source, the smaller the angle .
There is constructive interference along the lines shown (a cone in three dimensions) from similar sound waves
arriving there simultaneously. This superposition forms a disturbance called asonic boom, a constructive
interference of sound created by an object moving faster than sound. Inside the cone, the interference is mostly
destructive, and so the sound intensity there is much less than on the shock wave. An aircraft creates two sonic
booms, one from its nose and one from its tail. (SeeFigure 17.17.) During television coverage of space shuttle
landings, two distinct booms could often be heard. These were separated by exactly the time it would take the
shuttle to pass by a point. Observers on the ground often do not see the aircraft creating the sonic boom, because it
has passed by before the shock wave reaches them, as seen inFigure 17.17. If the aircraft flies close by at low
altitude, pressures in the sonic boom can be destructive and break windows as well as rattle nerves. Because of
how destructive sonic booms can be, supersonic flights are banned over populated areas of the United States.
PAGE: 760
742 17 • Physics of Hearing
FIGURE17.17Two sonic booms, created by the nose and tail of an aircraft, are observed on the ground after the plane has passed by.
Sonic booms are one example of a broader phenomenon called bow wakes. Abow wake, such as the one inFigure
17.18, is created when the wave source moves faster than the wave propagation speed. Water waves spread out in
circles from the point where created, and the bow wake is the familiar V-shaped wake trailing the source. A more
exotic bow wake is created when a subatomic particle travels through a medium faster than the speed of light
travels in that medium. (In a vacuum, the maximum speed of light will be ; in the medium of
water, the speed of light is closer to . If the particle creates light in its passage, that light spreads on a cone
with an angle indicative of the speed of the particle, as illustrated inFigure 17.19. Such a bow wake is called
Cerenkov radiation and is commonly observed in particle physics.
FIGURE17.18Bow wake created by a duck. Constructive interference produces the rather structured wake, while there is relatively little
wave action inside the wake, where interference is mostly destructive. (credit: Horia Varlan, Flickr)
FIGURE17.19The blue glow in this research reactor pool is Cerenkov radiation caused by subatomic particles traveling faster than the
speed of light in water. (credit: U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission)
Doppler shifts and sonic booms are interesting sound phenomena that occur in all types of waves. They can be of
considerable use. For example, the Doppler shift in ultrasound can be used to measure blood velocity, while police
use the Doppler shift in radar (a microwave) to measure car velocities. In meteorology, the Doppler shift is used to
track the motion of storm clouds; such “Doppler Radar” can give velocity and direction and rain or snow potential of
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 761
17.5 • Sound Interference and Resonance: Standing Waves in Air Columns 743
imposing weather fronts. In astronomy, we can examine the light emitted from distant galaxies and determine their
speed relative to ours. As galaxies move away from us, their light is shifted to a lower frequency, and so to a longer
wavelength—the so-called red shift. Such information from galaxies far, far away has allowed us to estimate the age
of the universe (from the Big Bang) as about 14 billion years.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Why did scientist Christian Doppler observe musicians both on a moving train and also from a stationary point not on
the train?
Solution
Doppler needed to compare the perception of sound when the observer is stationary and the sound source moves,
as well as when the sound source and the observer are both in motion.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Describe a situation in your life when you might rely on the Doppler shift to help you either while driving a car or
walking near traffic.
Solution
If I am driving and I hear Doppler shift in an ambulance siren, I would be able to tell when it was getting closer and
also if it has passed by. This would help me to know whether I needed to pull over and let the ambulance through.
17.5 Sound Interference and Resonance: Standing Waves in Air Columns
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define antinode, node, fundamental, overtones, and harmonics.
• Identify instances of sound interference in everyday situations.
• Describe how sound interference occurring inside open and closed tubes changes the characteristics of
the sound, and how this applies to sounds produced by musical instruments.
• Calculate the length of a tube using sound wave measurements.
FIGURE17.20Some types of headphones use the phenomena of constructive and destructive interference to cancel out outside noises.
(credit: JVC America, Flickr)
Interference is the hallmark of waves, all of which exhibit constructive and destructive interference exactly
analogous to that seen for water waves. In fact, one way to prove something “is a wave” is to observe interference
effects. So, sound being a wave, we expect it to exhibit interference; we have already mentioned a few such effects,
such as the beats from two similar notes played simultaneously.
Figure 17.21shows a clever use of sound interference to cancel noise. Larger-scale applications of active noise
reduction by destructive interference are contemplated for entire passenger compartments in commercial aircraft.
To obtain destructive interference, a fast electronic analysis is performed, and a second sound is introduced with its
maxima and minima exactly reversed from the incoming noise. Sound waves in fluids are pressure waves and
consistent with Pascal’s principle; pressures from two different sources add and subtract like simple numbers; that
PAGE: 762
744 17 • Physics of Hearing
is, positive and negative gauge pressures add to a much smaller pressure, producing a lower-intensity sound.
Although completely destructive interference is possible only under the simplest conditions, it is possible to reduce
noise levels by 30 dB or more using this technique.
FIGURE17.21Headphones designed to cancel noise with destructive interference create a sound wave exactly opposite to the incoming
sound. These headphones can be more effective than the simple passive attenuation used in most ear protection. Such headphones were
used on the record-setting, around the world nonstop flight of the Voyager aircraft to protect the pilots’ hearing from engine noise.
Where else can we observe sound interference? All sound resonances, such as in musical instruments, are due to
constructive and destructive interference. Only the resonant frequencies interfere constructively to form standing
waves, while others interfere destructively and are absent. From the toot made by blowing over a bottle, to the
characteristic flavor of a violin’s sounding box, to the recognizability of a great singer’s voice, resonance and
standing waves play a vital role.
Interference
Interference is such a fundamental aspect of waves that observing interference is proof that something is a
wave. The wave nature of light was established by experiments showing interference. Similarly, when electrons
scattered from crystals exhibited interference, their wave nature was confirmed to be exactly as predicted by
symmetry with certain wave characteristics of light.
Suppose we hold a tuning fork near the end of a tube that is closed at the other end, as shown inFigure 17.22,
Figure 17.23,Figure 17.24, andFigure 17.25. If the tuning fork has just the right frequency, the air column in the
tube resonates loudly, but at most frequencies it vibrates very little. This observation just means that the air column
has only certain natural frequencies. The figures show how a resonance at the lowest of these natural frequencies is
formed. A disturbance travels down the tube at the speed of sound and bounces off the closed end. If the tube is
just the right length, the reflected sound arrives back at the tuning fork exactly half a cycle later, and it interferes
constructively with the continuing sound produced by the tuning fork. The incoming and reflected sounds form a
standing wave in the tube as shown.
FIGURE17.22Resonance of air in a tube closed at one end, caused by a tuning fork. A disturbance moves down the tube.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 763
17.5 • Sound Interference and Resonance: Standing Waves in Air Columns 745
FIGURE17.23Resonance of air in a tube closed at one end, caused by a tuning fork. The disturbance reflects from the closed end of the
tube.
FIGURE17.24Resonance of air in a tube closed at one end, caused by a tuning fork. If the length of the tube is just right, the disturbance
gets back to the tuning fork half a cycle later and interferes constructively with the continuing sound from the tuning fork. This interference
forms a standing wave, and the air column resonates.
FIGURE17.25Resonance of air in a tube closed at one end, caused by a tuning fork. A graph of air displacement along the length of the
tube shows none at the closed end, where the motion is constrained, and a maximum at the open end. This standing wave has one-fourth
of its wavelength in the tube, so that .
The standing wave formed in the tube has its maximum air displacement (anantinode) at the open end, where
motion is unconstrained, and no displacement (anode) at the closed end, where air movement is halted. The
distance from a node to an antinode is one-fourth of a wavelength, and this equals the length of the tube; thus,
. This same resonance can be produced by a vibration introduced at or near the closed end of the tube, as
shown inFigure 17.26. It is best to consider this a natural vibration of the air column independently of how it is
induced.
PAGE: 764
746 17 • Physics of Hearing
FIGURE17.26The same standing wave is created in the tube by a vibration introduced near its closed end.
Given that maximum air displacements are possible at the open end and none at the closed end, there are other,
shorter wavelengths that can resonate in the tube, such as the one shown inFigure 17.27. Here the standing wave
has three-fourths of its wavelength in the tube, or , so that . Continuing this process reveals a
whole series of shorter-wavelength and higher-frequency sounds that resonate in the tube. We use specific terms
for the resonances in any system. The lowest resonant frequency is called thefundamental, while all higher
resonant frequencies are calledovertones. All resonant frequencies are integral multiples of the fundamental, and
they are collectively calledharmonics. The fundamental is the first harmonic, the first overtone is the second
harmonic, and so on.Figure 17.28shows the fundamental and the first three overtones (the first four harmonics) in
a tube closed at one end.
FIGURE17.27Another resonance for a tube closed at one end. This has maximum air displacements at the open end, and none at the
closed end. The wavelength is shorter, with three-fourths equaling the length of the tube, so that . This higher-frequency
vibration is the first overtone.
FIGURE17.28The fundamental and three lowest overtones for a tube closed at one end. All have maximum air displacements at the open
end and none at the closed end.
The fundamental and overtones can be present simultaneously in a variety of combinations. For example, middle C
on a trumpet has a sound distinctively different from middle C on a clarinet, both instruments being modified
versions of a tube closed at one end. The fundamental frequency is the same (and usually the most intense), but the
overtones and their mix of intensities are different and subject to shading by the musician. This mix is what gives
various musical instruments (and human voices) their distinctive characteristics, whether they have air columns,
strings, sounding boxes, or drumheads. In fact, much of our speech is determined by shaping the cavity formed by
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 765
17.5 • Sound Interference and Resonance: Standing Waves in Air Columns 747
the throat and mouth and positioning the tongue to adjust the fundamental and combination of overtones. Simple
resonant cavities can be made to resonate with the sound of the vowels, for example. (SeeFigure 17.29.) In males,
at puberty, the larynx grows and the shape of the resonant cavity changes giving rise to the difference in
predominant frequencies in speech between different sexes.
FIGURE17.29The throat and mouth form an air column closed at one end that resonates in response to vibrations in the voice box. The
spectrum of overtones and their intensities vary with mouth shaping and tongue position to form different sounds. The voice box can be
replaced with a mechanical vibrator, and understandable speech is still possible. Variations in basic shapes make different voices
recognizable.
Now let us look for a pattern in the resonant frequencies for a simple tube that is closed at one end. The
fundamental has , and frequency is related to wavelength and the speed of sound as given by:
17.28
Solving for in this equation gives
17.29
where is the speed of sound in air. Similarly, the first overtone has (seeFigure 17.28), so that
17.30
Because , we call the first overtone the third harmonic. Continuing this process, we see a pattern that can
be generalized in a single expression. The resonant frequencies of a tube closed at one end are
17.31
where is the fundamental, is the first overtone, and so on. It is interesting that the resonant frequencies
depend on the speed of sound and, hence, on temperature. This dependence poses a noticeable problem for organs
in old unheated cathedrals, and it is also the reason why musicians commonly bring their wind instruments to room
temperature before playing them.
EXAMPLE 17.5
Find the Length of a Tube with a 128 Hz Fundamental
(a) What length should a tube closed at one end have on a day when the air temperature, is , if its
fundamental frequency is to be 128 Hz (C below middle C)?
(b) What is the frequency of its fourth overtone?
Strategy
The length can be found from the relationship in , but we will first need to find the speed of sound .
Solution for (a)
(1) Identify knowns:
• the fundamental frequency is 128 Hz
PAGE: 766
748 17 • Physics of Hearing
• the air temperature is
(2) Use to find the fundamental frequency ( ).
17.32
(3) Solve this equation for length.
17.33
(4) Find the speed of sound using .
17.34
(5) Enter the values of the speed of sound and frequency into the expression for .
17.35
Discussion on (a)
Many wind instruments are modified tubes that have finger holes, valves, and other devices for changing the length
of the resonating air column and hence, the frequency of the note played. Horns producing very low frequencies,
such as tubas, require tubes so long that they are coiled into loops.
Solution for (b)
(1) Identify knowns:
• the first overtone has
• the second overtone has
• the third overtone has
• the fourth overtone has
(2) Enter the value for the fourth overtone into .
17.36
Discussion on (b)
Whether this overtone occurs in a simple tube or a musical instrument depends on how it is stimulated to vibrate
and the details of its shape. The trombone, for example, does not produce its fundamental frequency and only
makes overtones.
Another type of tube is one that isopenat both ends. Examples are some organ pipes, flutes, and oboes. The
resonances of tubes open at both ends can be analyzed in a very similar fashion to those for tubes closed at one
end. The air columns in tubes open at both ends have maximum air displacements at both ends, as illustrated in
Figure 17.30. Standing waves form as shown.
FIGURE17.30The resonant frequencies of a tube open at both ends are shown, including the fundamental and the first three overtones. In
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 767
17.5 • Sound Interference and Resonance: Standing Waves in Air Columns 749
all cases the maximum air displacements occur at both ends of the tube, giving it different natural frequencies than a tube closed at one
end.
Based on the fact that a tube open at both ends has maximum air displacements at both ends, and usingFigure
17.30as a guide, we can see that the resonant frequencies of a tube open at both ends are:
17.37
where is the fundamental, is the first overtone, is the second overtone, and so on. Note that a tube open at
both ends has a fundamental frequency twice what it would have if closed at one end. It also has a different
spectrum of overtones than a tube closed at one end. So if you had two tubes with the same fundamental frequency
but one was open at both ends and the other was closed at one end, they would sound different when played
because they have different overtones. Middle C, for example, would sound richer played on an open tube, because
it has even multiples of the fundamental as well as odd. A closed tube has only odd multiples.
Real-World Applications: Resonance in Everyday Systems
Resonance occurs in many different systems, including strings, air columns, and atoms. Resonance is the driven
or forced oscillation of a system at its natural frequency. At resonance, energy is transferred rapidly to the
oscillating system, and the amplitude of its oscillations grows until the system can no longer be described by
Hooke’s law. An example of this is the distorted sound intentionally produced in certain types of rock music.
Wind instruments use resonance in air columns to amplify tones made by lips or vibrating reeds. Other instruments
also use air resonance in clever ways to amplify sound.Figure 17.31shows a violin and a guitar, both of which have
sounding boxes but with different shapes, resulting in different overtone structures. The vibrating string creates a
sound that resonates in the sounding box, greatly amplifying the sound and creating overtones that give the
instrument its characteristic flavor. The more complex the shape of the sounding box, the greater its ability to
resonate over a wide range of frequencies. The marimba, like the one shown inFigure 17.32uses pots or gourds
below the wooden slats to amplify their tones. The resonance of the pot can be adjusted by adding water.
FIGURE17.31String instruments such as violins and guitars use resonance in their sounding boxes to amplify and enrich the sound
created by their vibrating strings. The bridge and supports couple the string vibrations to the sounding boxes and air within. (credits: guitar,
Feliciano Guimares, Fotopedia; violin, Steve Snodgrass, Flickr)
PAGE: 768
750 17 • Physics of Hearing
FIGURE17.32Resonance has been used in musical instruments since prehistoric times. This marimba uses gourds as resonance chambers
to amplify its sound. (credit: APC Events, Flickr)
We have emphasized sound applications in our discussions of resonance and standing waves, but these ideas apply
to any system that has wave characteristics. Vibrating strings, for example, are actually resonating and have
fundamentals and overtones similar to those for air columns. More subtle are the resonances in atoms due to the
wave character of their electrons. Their orbitals can be viewed as standing waves, which have a fundamental
(ground state) and overtones (excited states). It is fascinating that wave characteristics apply to such a wide range
of physical systems.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Describe how noise-canceling headphones differ from standard headphones used to block outside sounds.
Solution
Regular headphones only block sound waves with a physical barrier. Noise-canceling headphones use destructive
interference to reduce the loudness of outside sounds.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
How is it possible to use a standing wave's node and antinode to determine the length of a closed-end tube?
Solution
When the tube resonates at its natural frequency, the wave's node is located at the closed end of the tube, and the
antinode is located at the open end. The length of the tube is equal to one-fourth of the wavelength of this wave.
Thus, if we know the wavelength of the wave, we can determine the length of the tube.
17.6 Hearing
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define hearing, pitch, loudness, timbre, note, tone, phon, ultrasound, and infrasound.
• Compare loudness to frequency and intensity of a sound.
• Identify structures of the inner ear and explain how they relate to sound perception.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 769
17.6 • Hearing 751
FIGURE17.33Hearing allows this vocalist, his band, and his fans to enjoy music. (credit: West Point Public Affairs, Flickr)
The human ear has a tremendous range and sensitivity. It can give us a wealth of simple information—such as pitch,
loudness, and direction. And from its input we can detect musical quality and nuances of voiced emotion. How is our
hearing related to the physical qualities of sound, and how does the hearing mechanism work?
Hearingis the perception of sound. (Perception is commonly defined to be awareness through the senses, a
typically circular definition of higher-level processes in living organisms.) Normal human hearing encompasses
frequencies from 20 to 20,000 Hz, an impressive range. Sounds below 20 Hz are calledinfrasound, whereas those
above 20,000 Hz areultrasound. Neither is perceived by the ear, although infrasound can sometimes be felt as
vibrations. When we do hear low-frequency vibrations, such as the sounds of a diving board, we hear the individual
vibrations only because there are higher-frequency sounds in each. Other animals have hearing ranges different
from that of humans. Dogs can hear sounds as high as 30,000 Hz, whereas bats and dolphins can hear up to
100,000-Hz sounds. You may have noticed that dogs respond to the sound of a dog whistle which produces sound
out of the range of human hearing. Elephants are known to respond to frequencies below 20 Hz.
The perception of frequency is calledpitch. Most of us have excellent relative pitch, which means that we can tell
whether one sound has a different frequency from another. Typically, we can discriminate between two sounds if
their frequencies differ by 0.3% or more. For example, 500.0 and 501.5 Hz are noticeably different. Pitch perception
is directly related to frequency and is not greatly affected by other physical quantities such as intensity. Musical
notesare particular sounds that can be produced by most instruments and in Western music have particular names.
Combinations of notes constitute music. Some people can identify musical notes, such as A-sharp, C, or E-flat, just
by listening to them. This uncommon ability is called perfect pitch.
The ear is remarkably sensitive to low-intensity sounds. The lowest audible intensity or threshold is about
or 0 dB. Sounds as much as more intense can be briefly tolerated. Very few measuring devices
are capable of observations over a range of a trillion. The perception of intensity is calledloudness. At a given
frequency, it is possible to discern differences of about 1 dB, and a change of 3 dB is easily noticed. But loudness is
not related to intensity alone. Frequency has a major effect on how loud a sound seems. The ear has its maximum
sensitivity to frequencies in the range of 2000 to 5000 Hz, so that sounds in this range are perceived as being louder
than, say, those at 500 or 10,000 Hz, even when they all have the same intensity. Sounds near the high- and low-
frequency extremes of the hearing range seem even less loud, because the ear is even less sensitive at those
frequencies.Table 17.4gives the dependence of certain human hearing perceptions on physical quantities.
Perception Physical quantity
Pitch Frequency
Loudness Intensity and Frequency
Number and relative intensity of multiple frequencies.
Timbre
Subtle craftsmanship leads to non-linear effects and more detail.
TABLE17.4Sound Perceptions
PAGE: 770
752 17 • Physics of Hearing
Perception Physical quantity
Note Basic unit of music with specific names, combined to generate tunes
Tone Number and relative intensity of multiple frequencies.
TABLE17.4Sound Perceptions
When a violin plays middle C, there is no mistaking it for a piano playing the same note. The reason is that each
instrument produces a distinctive set of frequencies and intensities. We call our perception of these combinations of
frequencies and intensitiestonequality, or more commonly thetimbreof the sound. It is more difficult to correlate
timbre perception to physical quantities than it is for loudness or pitch perception. Timbre is more subjective. Terms
such as dull, brilliant, warm, cold, pure, and rich are employed to describe the timbre of a sound. So the
consideration of timbre takes us into the realm of perceptual psychology, where higher-level processes in the brain
are dominant. This is true for other perceptions of sound, such as music and noise. We shall not delve further into
them; rather, we will concentrate on the question of loudness perception.
A unit called aphonis used to express loudness numerically. Phons differ from decibels because the phon is a unit
of loudness perception, whereas the decibel is a unit of physical intensity.Figure 17.34shows the relationship of
loudness to intensity (or intensity level) and frequency for persons with normal hearing. The curved lines are equal-
loudness curves. Each curve is labeled with its loudness in phons. Any sound along a given curve will be perceived
as equally loud by the average person. The curves were determined by having large numbers of people compare the
loudness of sounds at different frequencies and sound intensity levels. At a frequency of 1000 Hz, phons are taken
to be numerically equal to decibels. The following example helps illustrate how to use the graph:
FIGURE17.34The relationship of loudness in phons to intensity level (in decibels) and intensity (in watts per meter squared) for persons
with normal hearing. The curved lines are equal-loudness curves—all sounds on a given curve are perceived as equally loud. Phons and
decibels are defined to be the same at 1000 Hz.
EXAMPLE 17.6
Measuring Loudness: Loudness Versus Intensity Level and Frequency
(a) What is the loudness in phons of a 100-Hz sound that has an intensity level of 80 dB? (b) What is the intensity
level in decibels of a 4000-Hz sound having a loudness of 70 phons? (c) At what intensity level will an 8000-Hz
sound have the same loudness as a 200-Hz sound at 60 dB?
Strategy for (a)
The graph inFigure 17.34should be referenced in order to solve this example. To find the loudness of a given sound,
you must know its frequency and intensity level and locate that point on the square grid, then interpolate between
loudness curves to get the loudness in phons.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 771
17.6 • Hearing 753
Solution for (a)
(1) Identify knowns:
• The square grid of the graph relating phons and decibels is a plot of intensity level versus frequency—both
physical quantities.
• 100 Hz at 80 dB lies halfway between the curves marked 70 and 80 phons.
(2) Find the loudness: 75 phons.
Strategy for (b)
The graph inFigure 17.34should be referenced in order to solve this example. To find the intensity level of a sound,
you must have its frequency and loudness. Once that point is located, the intensity level can be determined from the
vertical axis.
Solution for (b)
(1) Identify knowns:
• Values are given to be 4000 Hz at 70 phons.
(2) Follow the 70-phon curve until it reaches 4000 Hz. At that point, it is below the 70 dB line at about 67 dB.
(3) Find the intensity level:
67 dB
Strategy for (c)
The graph inFigure 17.34should be referenced in order to solve this example.
Solution for (c)
(1) Locate the point for a 200 Hz and 60 dB sound.
(2) Find the loudness: This point lies just slightly above the 50-phon curve, and so its loudness is 51 phons.
(3) Look for the 51-phon level is at 8000 Hz: 63 dB.
Discussion
These answers, like all information extracted fromFigure 17.34, have uncertainties of several phons or several
decibels, partly due to difficulties in interpolation, but mostly related to uncertainties in the equal-loudness curves.
Further examination of the graph inFigure 17.34reveals some interesting facts about human hearing. First, sounds
below the 0-phon curve are not perceived by most people. So, for example, a 60 Hz sound at 40 dB is inaudible. The
0-phon curve represents the threshold of normal hearing. We can hear some sounds at intensity levels below 0 dB.
For example, a 3-dB, 5000-Hz sound is audible, because it lies above the 0-phon curve. The loudness curves all
have dips in them between about 2000 and 5000 Hz. These dips mean the ear is most sensitive to frequencies in
that range. For example, a 15-dB sound at 4000 Hz has a loudness of 20 phons, the same as a 20-dB sound at 1000
Hz. The curves rise at both extremes of the frequency range, indicating that a greater-intensity level sound is
needed at those frequencies to be perceived to be as loud as at middle frequencies. For example, a sound at 10,000
Hz must have an intensity level of 30 dB to seem as loud as a 20 dB sound at 1000 Hz. Sounds above 120 phons are
painful as well as damaging.
We do not often utilize our full range of hearing. This is particularly true for frequencies above 8000 Hz, which are
rare in the environment and are unnecessary for understanding conversation or appreciating music. In fact, people
who have lost the ability to hear such high frequencies are usually unaware of their loss until tested. The shaded
region inFigure 17.35is the frequency and intensity region where most conversational sounds fall. The curved lines
indicate what effect hearing losses of 40 and 60 phons will have. A 40-phon hearing loss at all frequencies still
allows a person to understand conversation, although it will seem very quiet. A person with a 60-phon loss at all
PAGE: 772
754 17 • Physics of Hearing
frequencies will hear only the lowest frequencies and will not be able to understand speech unless it is much louder
than normal. Even so, speech may seem indistinct, because higher frequencies are not as well perceived. The
conversational speech region also has a gender component, in that female voices are usually characterized by
higher frequencies. So the person with a 60-phon hearing impediment might have difficulty understanding the
normal conversation of a woman.
FIGURE17.35The shaded region represents frequencies and intensity levels found in normal conversational speech. The 0-phon line
represents the normal hearing threshold, while those at 40 and 60 represent thresholds for people with 40- and 60-phon hearing losses,
respectively.
Hearing tests are performed over a range of frequencies, usually from 250 to 8000 Hz, and can be displayed
graphically in an audiogram like that inFigure 17.36. The hearing threshold is measured in dBrelative to the normal
threshold, so that normal hearing registers as 0 dB at all frequencies. Hearing loss caused by noise typically shows a
dip near the 4000Hz frequency, irrespective of the frequency that caused the loss and often affects both ears. The
most common form of hearing loss comes with age and is calledpresbycusis—literally elder ear. Such loss is
increasingly severe at higher frequencies, and interferes with music appreciation and speech recognition.
FIGURE17.36Audiograms showing the threshold in intensity level versus frequency for three different individuals. Intensity level is
measured relative to the normal threshold. The top left graph is that of a person with normal hearing. The graph to its right has a dip at
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 773
17.6 • Hearing 755
4000 Hz and is that of a child who suffered hearing loss due to a cap gun. The third graph is typical of presbycusis, the progressive loss of
higher frequency hearing with age. Tests performed by bone conduction (brackets) can distinguish nerve damage from middle ear damage.
The Hearing Mechanism
The hearing mechanism involves some interesting physics. The sound wave that impinges upon our ear is a
pressure wave. The ear is a transducer that converts sound waves into electrical nerve impulses in a manner
much more sophisticated than, but analogous to, a microphone.Figure 17.37shows the gross anatomy of the
ear with its division into three parts: the outer ear or ear canal; the middle ear, which runs from the eardrum to
the cochlea; and the inner ear, which is the cochlea itself. The body part normally referred to as the ear is
technically called the pinna.
FIGURE17.37The illustration shows the gross anatomy of the human ear.
The outer ear, or ear canal, carries sound to the recessed protected eardrum. The air column in the ear canal
resonates and is partially responsible for the sensitivity of the ear to sounds in the 2000 to 5000 Hz range. The
middle ear converts sound into mechanical vibrations and applies these vibrations to the cochlea. The lever system
of the middle ear takes the force exerted on the eardrum by sound pressure variations, amplifies it and transmits it
to the inner ear via the oval window, creating pressure waves in the cochlea approximately 40 times greater than
those impinging on the eardrum. (SeeFigure 17.38.) Two muscles in the middle ear (not shown) protect the inner
ear from very intense sounds. They react to intense sound in a few milliseconds and reduce the force transmitted to
the cochlea. This protective reaction can also be triggered by your own voice, so that humming while shooting a gun,
for example, can reduce noise damage.
FIGURE17.38This schematic shows the middle ear’s system for converting sound pressure into force, increasing that force through a lever
system, and applying the increased force to a small area of the cochlea, thereby creating a pressure about 40 times that in the original
sound wave. A protective muscle reaction to intense sounds greatly reduces the mechanical advantage of the lever system.
PAGE: 774
756 17 • Physics of Hearing
Figure 17.39shows the middle and inner ear in greater detail. Pressure waves moving through the cochlea cause
the tectorial membrane to vibrate, rubbing cilia (called hair cells), which stimulate nerves that send electrical signals
to the brain. The membrane resonates at different positions for different frequencies, with high frequencies
stimulating nerves at the near end and low frequencies at the far end. The complete operation of the cochlea is still
not understood, but several mechanisms for sending information to the brain are known to be involved. For sounds
below about 1000 Hz, the nerves send signals at the same frequency as the sound. For frequencies greater than
about 1000 Hz, the nerves signal frequency by position. There is a structure to the cilia, and there are connections
between nerve cells that perform signal processing before information is sent to the brain. Intensity information is
partly indicated by the number of nerve signals and by volleys of signals. The brain processes the cochlear nerve
signals to provide additional information such as source direction (based on time and intensity comparisons of
sounds from both ears). Higher-level processing produces many nuances, such as music appreciation.
FIGURE17.39The inner ear, or cochlea, is a coiled tube about 3 mm in diameter and 3 cm in length if uncoiled. When the oval window is
forced inward, as shown, a pressure wave travels through the perilymph in the direction of the arrows, stimulating nerves at the base of cilia
in the organ of Corti.
Hearing losses can occur because of problems in the middle or inner ear. Conductive losses in the middle ear can be
partially overcome by sending sound vibrations to the cochlea through the skull. Hearing aids for this purpose
usually press against the bone behind the ear, rather than simply amplifying the sound sent into the ear canal as
many hearing aids do. Damage to the nerves in the cochlea is not repairable, but amplification can partially
compensate. There is a risk that amplification will produce further damage. Another common failure in the cochlea
is damage or loss of the cilia but with nerves remaining functional. Cochlear implants that stimulate the nerves
directly are now available and widely accepted. Over 100,000 implants are in use, in about equal numbers of adults
and children.
The cochlear implant was pioneered in Melbourne, Australia, by Graeme Clark in the 1970s for his deaf father. The
implant consists of three external components and two internal components. The external components are a
microphone for picking up sound and converting it into an electrical signal, a speech processor to select certain
frequencies and a transmitter to transfer the signal to the internal components through electromagnetic induction.
The internal components consist of a receiver/transmitter secured in the bone beneath the skin, which converts the
signals into electric impulses and sends them through an internal cable to the cochlea and an array of about 24
electrodes wound through the cochlea. These electrodes in turn send the impulses directly into the brain. The
electrodes basically emulate the cilia.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Are ultrasound and infrasound imperceptible to all hearing organisms? Explain your answer.
Solution
No, the range of perceptible sound is based in the range of human hearing. Many other organisms perceive either
infrasound or ultrasound.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 775
17.7 • Ultrasound 757
17.7 Ultrasound
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define acoustic impedance and intensity reflection coefficient.
• Describe medical and other uses of ultrasound technology.
• Calculate acoustic impedance using density values and the speed of ultrasound.
• Calculate the velocity of a moving object using Doppler-shifted ultrasound.
FIGURE17.40Ultrasound is used in medicine to painlessly and noninvasively monitor patient health and diagnose a wide range of
disorders. (credit: abbybatchelder, Flickr)
Any sound with a frequency above 20,000 Hz (or 20 kHz)—that is, above the highest audible frequency—is defined
to be ultrasound. In practice, it is possible to create ultrasound frequencies up to more than a gigahertz. (Higher
frequencies are difficult to create; furthermore, they propagate poorly because they are very strongly absorbed.)
Ultrasound has a tremendous number of applications, which range from burglar alarms to use in cleaning delicate
objects to the guidance systems of bats. We begin our discussion of ultrasound with some of its applications in
medicine, in which it is used extensively both for diagnosis and for therapy.
Characteristics of Ultrasound
The characteristics of ultrasound, such as frequency and intensity, are wave properties common to all types of
waves. Ultrasound also has a wavelength that limits the fineness of detail it can detect. This characteristic is true
of all waves. We can never observe details significantly smaller than the wavelength of our probe; for example,
we will never see individual atoms with visible light, because the atoms are so small compared with the
wavelength of light.
Ultrasound in Medical Therapy
Ultrasound, like any wave, carries energy that can be absorbed by the medium carrying it, producing effects that
vary with intensity. When focused to intensities of to , ultrasound can be used to shatter gallstones or
pulverize cancerous tissue in surgical procedures. (SeeFigure 17.41.) Intensities this great can damage individual
cells, variously causing their protoplasm to stream inside them, altering their permeability, or rupturing their walls
throughcavitation. Cavitation is the creation of vapor cavities in a fluid—the longitudinal vibrations in ultrasound
alternatively compress and expand the medium, and at sufficient amplitudes the expansion separates molecules.
Most cavitation damage is done when the cavities collapse, producing even greater shock pressures.
PAGE: 776
758 17 • Physics of Hearing
FIGURE17.41The tip of this small probe oscillates at 23 kHz with such a large amplitude that it pulverizes tissue on contact. The debris is
then aspirated. The speed of the tip may exceed the speed of sound in tissue, thus creating shock waves and cavitation, rather than a
smooth simple harmonic oscillator–type wave.
Most of the energy carried by high-intensity ultrasound in tissue is converted to thermal energy. In fact, intensities of
to are commonly used for deep-heat treatments called ultrasound diathermy. Frequencies of 0.8 to
1 MHz are typical. In both athletics and physical therapy, ultrasound diathermy is most often applied to injured or
overworked muscles to relieve pain and improve flexibility. Skill is needed by the therapist to avoid “bone burns”
and other tissue damage caused by overheating and cavitation, sometimes made worse by reflection and focusing
of the ultrasound by joint and bone tissue.
In some instances, you may encounter a different decibel scale, called the soundpressurelevel, when ultrasound
travels in water or in human and other biological tissues. We shall not use the scale here, but it is notable that
numbers for sound pressure levels range 60 to 70 dB higher than you would quote for , the sound intensity level
used in this text. Should you encounter a sound pressure level of 220 decibels, then, it is not an astronomically high
intensity, but equivalent to about 155 dB—high enough to destroy tissue, but not as unreasonably high as it might
seem at first.
Ultrasound in Medical Diagnostics
When used for imaging, ultrasonic waves are emitted from a transducer, a crystal exhibiting the piezoelectric effect
(the expansion and contraction of a substance when a voltage is applied across it, causing a vibration of the crystal).
These high-frequency vibrations are transmitted into any tissue in contact with the transducer. Similarly, if a
pressure is applied to the crystal (in the form of a wave reflected off tissue layers), a voltage is produced which can
be recorded. The crystal therefore acts as both a transmitter and a receiver of sound. Ultrasound is also partially
absorbed by tissue on its path, both on its journey away from the transducer and on its return journey. From the time
between when the original signal is sent and when the reflections from various boundaries between media are
received, (as well as a measure of the intensity loss of the signal), the nature and position of each boundary between
tissues and organs may be deduced.
Reflections at boundaries between two different media occur because of differences in a characteristic known as
theacoustic impedance of each substance. Impedance is defined as
17.38
where is the density of the medium (in ) and is the speed of sound through the medium (in m/s). The units
for are therefore .
Table 17.5shows the density and speed of sound through various media (including various soft tissues) and the
associated acoustic impedances. Note that the acoustic impedances for soft tissue do not vary much but that there
is a big difference between the acoustic impedance of soft tissue and air and also between soft tissue and bone.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 777
17.7 • Ultrasound 759
Density Speed of Ultrasound Acoustic Impedance
Medium
(kg/m3) (m/s)
Air 1.3 330
Water 1000 1500
Blood 1060 1570
Fat 925 1450
Muscle (average) 1075 1590
Bone (varies) 1400–1900 4080 to
Barium titanate (transducer
5600 5500
material)
TABLE17.5The Ultrasound Properties of Various Media, Including Soft Tissue Found in the Body
At the boundary between media of different acoustic impedances, some of the wave energy is reflected and some is
transmitted. The greater thedifferencein acoustic impedance between the two media, the greater the reflection
and the smaller the transmission.
Theintensity reflection coefficient is defined as the ratio of the intensity of the reflected wave relative to the
incident (transmitted) wave. This statement can be written mathematically as
17.39
where and are the acoustic impedances of the two media making up the boundary. A reflection coefficient of
zero (corresponding to total transmission and no reflection) occurs when the acoustic impedances of the two media
are the same. An impedance “match” (no reflection) provides an efficient coupling of sound energy from one
medium to another. The image formed in an ultrasound is made by tracking reflections (as shown inFigure 17.42)
and mapping the intensity of the reflected sound waves in a two-dimensional plane.
EXAMPLE 17.7
Calculate Acoustic Impedance and Intensity Reflection Coefficient: Ultrasound and Fat
Tissue
(a) Using the values for density and the speed of ultrasound given inTable 17.5, show that the acoustic impedance
of fat tissue is indeed .
(b) Calculate the intensity reflection coefficient of ultrasound when going from fat to muscle tissue.
Strategy for (a)
The acoustic impedance can be calculated using and the values for and found inTable 17.5.
Solution for (a)
(1) Substitute known values fromTable 17.5into .
17.40
(2) Calculate to find the acoustic impedance of fat tissue.
PAGE: 778
760 17 • Physics of Hearing
17.41
This value is the same as the value given for the acoustic impedance of fat tissue.
Strategy for (b)
The intensity reflection coefficient for any boundary between two media is given by , and the
acoustic impedance of muscle is given inTable 17.5.
Solution for (b)
Substitute known values into to find the intensity reflection coefficient:
17.42
Discussion
This result means that only 1.4% of the incident intensity is reflected, with the remaining being transmitted.
The applications of ultrasound in medical diagnostics have produced untold benefits with no known risks. Diagnostic
intensities are too low (about ) to cause thermal damage. More significantly, ultrasound has been in use
for several decades and detailed follow-up studies do not show evidence of ill effects, quite unlike the case for x-
rays.
FIGURE17.42(a) An ultrasound speaker doubles as a microphone. Brief bleeps are broadcast, and echoes are recorded from various
depths. (b) Graph of echo intensity versus time. The time for echoes to return is directly proportional to the distance of the reflector,
yielding this information noninvasively.
The most common ultrasound applications produce an image like that shown inFigure 17.43. The speaker-
microphone broadcasts a directional beam, sweeping the beam across the area of interest. This is accomplished by
having multiple ultrasound sources in the probe’s head, which are phased to interfere constructively in a given,
adjustable direction. Echoes are measured as a function of position as well as depth. A computer constructs an
image that reveals the shape and density of internal structures.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 779
17.7 • Ultrasound 761
FIGURE17.43(a) An ultrasonic image is produced by sweeping the ultrasonic beam across the area of interest, in this case the person's
abdomen. Data are recorded and analyzed in a computer, providing a two-dimensional image (credit: COD Newsroom, Flickr). (b)
Ultrasound image of 12-week-old fetus. (credit: Public Health Image Library, CDC)
How much detail can ultrasound reveal? The image inFigure 17.43is typical of low-cost systems, but that inFigure
17.44shows the remarkable detail possible with more advanced systems, including 3D imaging. Ultrasound today is
commonly used in prenatal care. Such imaging can be used to see if the fetus is developing at a normal rate, and
help in the determination of serious problems early in the pregnancy. Ultrasound is also in wide use to image the
chambers of the heart and the flow of blood within the beating heart, using the Doppler effect (echocardiology).
Whenever a wave is used as a probe, it is very difficult to detect details smaller than its wavelength . Indeed,
current technology cannot do quite this well. Abdominal scans may use a 7-MHz frequency, and the speed of sound
in tissue is about 1540 m/s—so the wavelength limit to detail would be . In
practice, 1-mm detail is attainable, which is sufficient for many purposes. Higher-frequency ultrasound would allow
greater detail, but it does not penetrate as well as lower frequencies do. The accepted rule of thumb is that you can
effectively scan to a depth of about into tissue. For 7 MHz, this penetration limit is , which is
0.11 m. Higher frequencies may be employed in smaller organs, such as the eye, but are not practical for looking
deep into the body.
FIGURE17.44A 3D ultrasound image of a fetus. (credit: Jennie Cu, Wikimedia Commons)
In addition to shape information, ultrasonic scans can produce density information superior to that found in X-rays,
because the intensity of a reflected sound is related to changes in density. Sound is most strongly reflected at places
where density changes are greatest.
Another major use of ultrasound in medical diagnostics is to detect motion and determine velocity through the
Doppler shift of an echo, known asDoppler-shifted ultrasound. This technique is used to monitor fetal heartbeat,
measure blood velocity, and detect occlusions in blood vessels, for example. (SeeFigure 17.45.) The magnitude of
the Doppler shift in an echo is directly proportional to the velocity of whatever reflects the sound. Because an echo
is involved, there is actually a double shift. The first occurs because the reflector (say a fetal heart) is a moving
observer and receives a Doppler-shifted frequency. The reflector then acts as a moving source, producing a second
Doppler shift.
PAGE: 780
762 17 • Physics of Hearing
FIGURE17.45This Doppler-shifted ultrasonic image of a partially occluded artery uses color to indicate velocity. The highest velocities are
in red, while the lowest are blue. The blood must move faster through the constriction to carry the same flow. (credit: Arning C, Grzyska U,
Wikimedia Commons)
A clever technique is used to measure the Doppler shift in an echo. The frequency of the echoed sound is
superimposed on the broadcast frequency, producing beats. The beat frequency is , and so it is
directly proportional to the Doppler shift ( ) and hence, the reflector’s velocity. The advantage in this
technique is that the Doppler shift is small (because the reflector’s velocity is small), so that great accuracy would
be needed to measure the shift directly. But measuring the beat frequency is easy, and it is not affected if the
broadcast frequency varies somewhat. Furthermore, the beat frequency is in the audible range and can be amplified
for audio feedback to the medical observer.
Uses for Doppler-Shifted Radar
Doppler-shifted radar echoes are used to measure wind velocities in storms as well as aircraft and automobile
speeds. The principle is the same as for Doppler-shifted ultrasound. There is evidence that bats and dolphins
may also sense the velocity of an object (such as prey) reflecting their ultrasound signals by observing its
Doppler shift.
EXAMPLE 17.8
Calculate Velocity of Blood: Doppler-Shifted Ultrasound
Ultrasound that has a frequency of 2.50 MHz is sent toward blood in an artery that is moving toward the source at
20.0 cm/s, as illustrated inFigure 17.46. Use the speed of sound in human tissue as 1540 m/s. (Assume that the
frequency of 2.50 MHz is accurate to seven significant figures.)
a. What frequency does the blood receive?
b. What frequency returns to the source?
c. What beat frequency is produced if the source and returning frequencies are mixed?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 781
17.7 • Ultrasound 763
FIGURE17.46Ultrasound is partly reflected by blood cells and plasma back toward the speaker-microphone. Because the cells are
moving, two Doppler shifts are produced—one for blood as a moving observer, and the other for the reflected sound coming from a moving
source. The magnitude of the shift is directly proportional to blood velocity.
Strategy
The first two questions can be answered using and for the Doppler
shift. The last question asks for beat frequency, which is the difference between the original and returning
frequencies.
Solution for (a)
(1) Identify knowns:
• The blood is a moving observer, and so the frequency it receives is given by
17.43
• is the blood velocity ( here) and the plus sign is chosen because the motion is toward the source.
(2) Enter the given values into the equation.
17.44
(3) Calculate to find the frequency: 2,500,325 Hz.
Solution for (b)
(1) Identify knowns:
• The blood acts as a moving source.
• The microphone acts as a stationary observer.
• The frequency leaving the blood is 2,500,325 Hz, but it is shifted upward as given by
17.45
is the frequency received by the speaker-microphone.
• The source velocity is .
• The minus sign is used because the motion is toward the observer.
The minus sign is used because the motion is toward the observer.
PAGE: 782
764 17 • Physics of Hearing
(2) Enter the given values into the equation:
17.46
(3) Calculate to find the frequency returning to the source: 2,500,649 Hz.
Solution for (c)
(1) Identify knowns:
• The beat frequency is simply the absolute value of the difference between and , as stated in:
17.47
(2) Substitute known values:
17.48
(3) Calculate to find the beat frequency: 649 Hz.
Discussion
The Doppler shifts are quite small compared with the original frequency of 2.50 MHz. It is far easier to measure the
beat frequency than it is to measure the echo frequency with an accuracy great enough to see shifts of a few
hundred hertz out of a couple of megahertz. Furthermore, variations in the source frequency do not greatly affect
the beat frequency, because both and would increase or decrease. Those changes subtract out in
Industrial and Other Applications of Ultrasound
Industrial, retail, and research applications of ultrasound are common. A few are discussed here. Ultrasonic
cleaners have many uses. Jewelry, machined parts, and other objects that have odd shapes and crevices are
immersed in a cleaning fluid that is agitated with ultrasound typically about 40 kHz in frequency. The intensity is
great enough to cause cavitation, which is responsible for most of the cleansing action. Because cavitation-
produced shock pressures are large and well transmitted in a fluid, they reach into small crevices where even a
low-surface-tension cleaning fluid might not penetrate.
Sonar is a familiar application of ultrasound. Sonar typically employs ultrasonic frequencies in the range from
30.0 to 100 kHz. Bats, dolphins, submarines, and even some birds use ultrasonic sonar. Echoes are analyzed to
give distance and size information both for guidance and finding prey. In most sonar applications, the sound
reflects quite well because the objects of interest have significantly different density than the medium in which
they travel. When the Doppler shift is observed, velocity information can also be obtained. Submarine sonar can
be used to obtain such information, and there is evidence that some bats also sense velocity from their echoes.
Similarly, there are a range of relatively inexpensive devices that measure distance by timing ultrasonic echoes.
Many cameras, for example, use such information to focus automatically. Some doors open when their
ultrasonic ranging devices detect a nearby object, and certain home security lights turn on when their ultrasonic
rangers observe motion. Ultrasonic “measuring tapes” also exist to measure such things as room dimensions.
Sinks in public restrooms are sometimes automated with ultrasound devices to turn faucets on and off when
people wash their hands. These devices reduce the spread of germs and can conserve water.
Ultrasound is used for nondestructive testing in industry and by the military. Because ultrasound reflects well
from any large change in density, it can reveal cracks and voids in solids, such as aircraft wings, that are too
small to be seen with x-rays. For similar reasons, ultrasound is also good for measuring the thickness of
coatings, particularly where there are several layers involved.
Basic research in solid state physics employs ultrasound. Its attenuation is related to a number of physical
characteristics, making it a useful probe. Among these characteristics are structural changes such as those
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 783
17.7 • Ultrasound 765
found in liquid crystals, the transition of a material to a superconducting phase, as well as density and other
properties.
These examples of the uses of ultrasound are meant to whet the appetites of the curious, as well as to illustrate
the underlying physics of ultrasound. There are many more applications, as you can easily discover for yourself.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Why is it possible to use ultrasound both to observe a fetus in the womb and also to destroy cancerous tumors in the
body?
Solution
Ultrasound can be used medically at different intensities. Lower intensities do not cause damage and are used for
medical imaging. Higher intensities can pulverize and destroy targeted substances in the body, such as tumors.
PAGE: 784
766 17 • Glossary
Glossary
acoustic impedance property of medium that makes intensity of the incident wave
the propagation of sound waves more difficult loudness the perception of sound intensity
antinode point of maximum displacement node point of zero displacement
bow wake V-shaped disturbance created when the note basic unit of music with specific names,
wave source moves faster than the wave combined to generate tunes
propagation speed overtones all resonant frequencies higher than the
Doppler effect an alteration in the observed fundamental
frequency of a sound due to motion of either the phon the numerical unit of loudness
source or the observer pitch the perception of the frequency of a sound
Doppler shift the actual change in frequency due to sonic boom a constructive interference of sound
relative motion of source and observer created by an object moving faster than sound
Doppler-shifted ultrasound a medical technique to sound a disturbance of matter that is transmitted
detect motion and determine velocity through the from its source outward
Doppler shift of an echo sound intensity level a unitless quantity telling you
fundamental the lowest-frequency resonance the level of the sound relative to a fixed standard
harmonics the term used to refer collectively to the sound pressure level the ratio of the pressure
fundamental and its overtones amplitude to a reference pressure
hearing the perception of sound timbre number and relative intensity of multiple
infrasound sounds below 20 Hz sound frequencies
intensity the power per unit area carried by a wave tone number and relative intensity of multiple sound
intensity reflection coefficient a measure of the frequencies
ratio of the intensity of the wave reflected off a ultrasound sounds above 20,000 Hz
boundary between two media relative to the
Section Summary
17.1Sound for is watts per meter squared. The intensity of a
sound wave is also related to the pressure
• Sound is a disturbance of matter that is
amplitude
transmitted from its source outward.
• Sound is one type of wave.
• Hearing is the perception of sound.
where is the density of the medium in which the
17.2Speed of Sound, Frequency, and
sound wave travels and is the speed of sound
Wavelength
in the medium.
The relationship of the speed of sound , its
• Sound intensity level in units of decibels (dB) is
frequency , and its wavelength is given by
which is the same relationship given for all waves.
where is the threshold intensity
In air, the speed of sound is related to air temperature of hearing.
by
17.4Doppler Effect and Sonic Booms
• The Doppler effect is an alteration in the observed
frequency of a sound due to motion of either the
is the same for all frequencies and wavelengths.
source or the observer.
17.3Sound Intensity and Sound Level • The actual change in frequency is called the
Doppler shift.
• Intensity is the same for a sound wave as was
• A sonic boom is constructive interference of sound
defined for all waves; it is
created by an object moving faster than sound.
• A sonic boom is a type of bow wake created when
any wave source moves faster than the wave
where is the power crossing area . The SI unit propagation speed.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 785
17 • Conceptual Questions 767
• For a stationary observer and a moving source, the • The resonant frequencies of a tube open at both
observed frequency is: ends are:
where is the frequency of the source, is the 17.6Hearing
speed of the source, and is the speed of sound.
• The range of audible frequencies is 20 to 20,000
The minus sign is used for motion toward the
Hz.
observer and the plus sign for motion away.
• Those sounds above 20,000 Hz are ultrasound,
• For a stationary source and moving observer, the
whereas those below 20 Hz are infrasound.
observed frequency is:
• The perception of frequency is pitch.
• The perception of intensity is loudness.
• Loudness has units of phons.
where is the speed of the observer.
17.7Ultrasound
17.5Sound Interference and Resonance:
Standing Waves in Air Columns • The acoustic impedance is defined as:
• Sound interference and resonance have the same
is the density of a medium through which the
properties as defined for all waves.
sound travels and is the speed of sound through
• In air columns, the lowest-frequency resonance is
that medium.
called the fundamental, whereas all higher
• The intensity reflection coefficient , a measure of
resonant frequencies are called overtones.
the ratio of the intensity of the wave reflected off a
Collectively, they are called harmonics.
boundary between two media relative to the
• The resonant frequencies of a tube closed at one
intensity of the incident wave, is given by
end are:
is the fundamental and is the length of the • The intensity reflection coefficient is a unitless
tube. quantity.
Conceptual Questions
17.2Speed of Sound, Frequency, and 4. A community is concerned about a plan to bring
Wavelength train service to their downtown from the town’s
outskirts. The current sound intensity level, even
1. How do sound vibrations of atoms differ from
though the rail yard is blocks away, is 70 dB
thermal motion?
downtown. The mayor assures the public that there
2. When sound passes from one medium to another
will be a difference of only 30 dB in sound in the
where its propagation speed is different, does its
downtown area. Should the townspeople be
frequency or wavelength change? Explain your
concerned? Why?
answer briefly.
17.4Doppler Effect and Sonic Booms
17.3Sound Intensity and Sound Level
5. Is the Doppler shift real or just a sensory illusion?
3. Six members of a synchronized swim team wear
6. Due to efficiency considerations related to its bow
earplugs to protect themselves against water
wake, the supersonic transport aircraft must
pressure at depths, but they can still hear the music
maintain a cruising speed that is a constant ratio to
and perform the combinations in the water
the speed of sound (a constant Mach number). If
perfectly. One day, they were asked to leave the
the aircraft flies from warm air into colder air,
pool so the dive team could practice a few dives,
should it increase or decrease its speed? Explain
and they tried to practice on a mat, but seemed to
your answer.
have a lot more difficulty. Why might this be?
7. When you hear a sonic boom, you often cannot see
the plane that made it. Why is that?
PAGE: 786
768 17 • Problems & Exercises
17.5Sound Interference and Resonance: 17.7Ultrasound
Standing Waves in Air Columns
12. If audible sound follows a rule of thumb similar to
8. How does an unamplified guitar produce sounds so that for ultrasound, in terms of its absorption,
much more intense than those of a plucked string would you expect the high or low frequencies from
held taut by a simple stick? your neighbor’s stereo to penetrate into your
9. You are given two wind instruments of identical house? How does this expectation compare with
length. One is open at both ends, whereas the other your experience?
is closed at one end. Which is able to produce the 13. Elephants and whales are known to use
lowest frequency? infrasound to communicate over very large
10. What is the difference between an overtone and a distances. What are the advantages of infrasound
harmonic? Are all harmonics overtones? Are all for long distance communication?
overtones harmonics? 14. It is more difficult to obtain a high-resolution
ultrasound image in the abdominal region of
17.6Hearing someone who is overweight than for someone
who has a slight build. Explain why this statement
11. Why can a hearing test show that your threshold of
is accurate.
hearing is 0 dB at 250 Hz, whenFigure 17.35
15. Suppose you read that 210-dB ultrasound is being
implies that no one can hear such a frequency at
used to pulverize cancerous tumors. You calculate
less than 20 dB?
the intensity in watts per centimeter squared and
find it is unreasonably high ( ). What is
a possible explanation?
Problems & Exercises
17.2Speed of Sound, Frequency, and 9. (a) If a submarine’s sonar can measure echo times
Wavelength with a precision of 0.0100 s, what is the smallest
difference in distances it can detect? (Assume that
1. When poked by a spear, an operatic soprano lets
the submarine is in the ocean, not in fresh water.)
out a 1200-Hz shriek. What is its wavelength if the
(b) Discuss the limits this time resolution imposes
speed of sound is 345 m/s?
on the ability of the sonar system to detect the size
2. What frequency sound has a 0.10-m wavelength
and shape of the object creating the echo.
when the speed of sound is 340 m/s?
10. A physicist at a fireworks display times the lag
3. Calculate the speed of sound on a day when a 1500
between seeing an explosion and hearing its
Hz frequency has a wavelength of 0.221 m.
sound, and finds it to be 0.400 s. (a) How far away
4. (a) What is the speed of sound in a medium where a
is the explosion if air temperature is and if
100-kHz frequency produces a 5.96-cm
you neglect the time taken for light to reach the
wavelength? (b) Which substance inTable 17.1is
physicist? (b) Calculate the distance to the
this likely to be?
explosion taking the speed of light into account.
5. Show that the speed of sound in air is 343
Note that this distance is negligibly greater.
m/s, as claimed in the text.
11. Suppose a bat uses sound echoes to locate its
6. Air temperature in the Sahara Desert can reach
insect prey, 3.00 m away. (SeeFigure 17.9.) (a)
(about ). What is the speed of sound
Calculate the echo times for temperatures of
in air at that temperature?
and . (b) What percent uncertainty
7. Dolphins make sounds in air and water. What is the
does this cause for the bat in locating the insect?
ratio of the wavelength of a sound in air to its
(c) Discuss the significance of this uncertainty and
wavelength in seawater? Assume air temperature is
whether it could cause difficulties for the bat. (In
.
practice, the bat continues to use sound as it
8. A sonar echo returns to a submarine 1.20 s after
closes in, eliminating most of any difficulties
being emitted. What is the distance to the object
imposed by this and other effects, such as motion
creating the echo? (Assume that the submarine is in
of the prey.)
the ocean, not in fresh water.)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 787
17 • Problems & Exercises 769
17.3Sound Intensity and Sound Level 26. An 8-hour exposure to a sound intensity level of
90.0 dB may cause hearing damage. What energy
12. What is the intensity in watts per meter squared of
in joules falls on a 0.800-cm-diameter eardrum so
85.0-dB sound?
exposed?
13. The warning tag on a lawn mower states that it
27. (a) Ear trumpets were never very common, but
produces noise at a level of 91.0 dB. What is this
they did aid people with hearing losses by
in watts per meter squared?
gathering sound over a large area and
14. A sound wave traveling in air has a pressure
concentrating it on the smaller area of the
amplitude of 0.5Pa. What is the intensity of the
eardrum. What decibel increase does an ear
wave?
trumpet produce if its sound gathering area is
15. What intensity level does the sound in the
and the area of the eardrum is
preceding problem correspond to?
, but the trumpet only has an efficiency
16. What sound intensity level in dB is produced by
of 5.00% in transmitting the sound to the
earphones that create an intensity of
eardrum? (b) Comment on the usefulness of the
?
decibel increase found in part (a).
17. Show that an intensity of is the same
28. Sound is more effectively transmitted into a
as .
stethoscope by direct contact than through the air,
18. (a) What is the decibel level of a sound that is
and it is further intensified by being concentrated
twice as intense as a 90.0-dB sound? (b) What is
on the smaller area of the eardrum. It is
the decibel level of a sound that is one-fifth as
reasonable to assume that sound is transmitted
intense as a 90.0-dB sound?
into a stethoscope 100 times as effectively
19. (a) What is the intensity of a sound that has a level
compared with transmission though the air. What,
7.00 dB lower than a sound?
then, is the gain in decibels produced by a
(b) What is the intensity of a sound that is 3.00 dB
stethoscope that has a sound gathering area of
higher than a sound?
, and concentrates the sound onto two
20. (a) How much more intense is a sound that has a
eardrums with a total area of with an
level 17.0 dB higher than another? (b) If one
efficiency of 40.0%?
sound has a level 23.0 dB less than another, what
29. Loudspeakers can produce intense sounds with
is the ratio of their intensities?
surprisingly small energy input in spite of their low
21. People with good hearing can perceive sounds as
efficiencies. Calculate the power input needed to
low in level as at a frequency of 3000
produce a 90.0-dB sound intensity level for a
Hz. What is the intensity of this sound in watts per
12.0-cm-diameter speaker that has an efficiency
meter squared?
of 1.00%. (This value is the sound intensity level
22. If a large housefly 3.0 m away from you makes a
right at the speaker.)
noise of 40.0 dB, what is the noise level of 1000
flies at that distance, assuming interference has a
17.4Doppler Effect and Sonic Booms
negligible effect?
23. Ten cars in a circle at a boom box competition 30. (a) What frequency is received by a person
produce a 120-dB sound intensity level at the watching an oncoming ambulance moving at 110
center of the circle. What is the average sound km/h and emitting a steady 800-Hz sound from its
intensity level produced there by each stereo, siren? The speed of sound on this day is 345 m/s.
assuming interference effects can be neglected? (b) What frequency does she receive after the
24. The amplitude of a sound wave is measured in ambulance has passed?
terms of its maximum gauge pressure. By what 31. (a) At an air show a jet flies directly toward the
factor does the amplitude of a sound wave stands at a speed of 1200 km/h, emitting a
increase if the sound intensity level goes up by frequency of 3500 Hz, on a day when the speed of
40.0 dB? sound is 342 m/s. What frequency is received by
25. If a sound intensity level of 0 dB at 1000 Hz the observers? (b) What frequency do they receive
corresponds to a maximum gauge pressure as the plane flies directly away from them?
(sound amplitude) of , what is the 32. What frequency is received by a mouse just before
maximum gauge pressure in a 60-dB sound? What being dispatched by a hawk flying at it at 25.0 m/s
is the maximum gauge pressure in a 120-dB and emitting a screech of frequency 3500 Hz?
sound? Take the speed of sound to be 331 m/s.
PAGE: 788
770 17 • Problems & Exercises
33. A spectator at a parade receives an 888-Hz tone 43. If a wind instrument, such as a tuba, has a
from an oncoming trumpeter who is playing an fundamental frequency of 32.0 Hz, what are its
880-Hz note. At what speed is the musician first three overtones? It is closed at one end. (The
approaching if the speed of sound is 338 m/s? overtones of a real tuba are more complex than
34. A commuter train blows its 200-Hz horn as it this example, because it is a tapered tube.)
approaches a crossing. The speed of sound is 335 44. What are the first three overtones of a bassoon
m/s. (a) An observer waiting at the crossing that has a fundamental frequency of 90.0 Hz? It is
receives a frequency of 208 Hz. What is the speed open at both ends. (The overtones of a real
of the train? (b) What frequency does the observer bassoon are more complex than this example,
receive as the train moves away? because its double reed makes it act more like a
35. Can you perceive the shift in frequency produced tube closed at one end.)
when you pull a tuning fork toward you at 10.0 45. How long must a flute be in order to have a
m/s on a day when the speed of sound is 344 m/ fundamental frequency of 262 Hz (this frequency
s? To answer this question, calculate the factor by corresponds to middle C on the evenly tempered
which the frequency shifts and see if it is greater chromatic scale) on a day when air temperature is
than 0.300%. ? It is open at both ends.
36. Two eagles fly directly toward one another, the 46. What length should an oboe have to produce a
first at 15.0 m/s and the second at 20.0 m/s. Both fundamental frequency of 110 Hz on a day when
screech, the first one emitting a frequency of 3200 the speed of sound is 343 m/s? It is open at both
Hz and the second one emitting a frequency of ends.
3800 Hz. What frequencies do they receive if the 47. What is the length of a tube that has a
speed of sound is 330 m/s? fundamental frequency of 176 Hz and a first
37. What is the minimum speed at which a source overtone of 352 Hz if the speed of sound is 343 m/
must travel toward you for you to be able to hear s?
that its frequency is Doppler shifted? That is, what 48. (a) Find the length of an organ pipe closed at one
speed produces a shift of 0.300% on a day when end that produces a fundamental frequency of
the speed of sound is 331 m/s? 256 Hz when air temperature is . (b) What
is its fundamental frequency at ?
17.5Sound Interference and Resonance: 49. By what fraction will the frequencies produced by
Standing Waves in Air Columns a wind instrument change when air temperature
goes from to ? That is, find the ratio
38. A “showy” custom-built car has two brass horns
of the frequencies at those temperatures.
that are supposed to produce the same frequency
50. The ear canal resonates like a tube closed at one
but actually emit 263.8 and 264.5 Hz. What beat
end. (SeeFigure 17.37.) If ear canals range in
frequency is produced?
length from 1.80 to 2.60 cm in an average
39. What beat frequencies will be present: (a) If the
population, what is the range of fundamental
musical notes A and C are played together
resonant frequencies? Take air temperature to be
(frequencies of 220 and 264 Hz)? (b) If D and F
, which is the same as body temperature.
are played together (frequencies of 297 and 352
How does this result correlate with the intensity
Hz)? (c) If all four are played together?
versus frequency graph (Figure 17.35of the
40. What beat frequencies result if a piano hammer
human ear?
hits three strings that emit frequencies of 127.8,
51. Calculate the first overtone in an ear canal, which
128.1, and 128.3 Hz?
resonates like a 2.40-cm-long tube closed at one
41. A piano tuner hears a beat every 2.00 s when
end, by taking air temperature to be . Is the
listening to a 264.0-Hz tuning fork and a single
ear particularly sensitive to such a frequency?
piano string. What are the two possible
(The resonances of the ear canal are complicated
frequencies of the string?
by its nonuniform shape, which we shall ignore.)
42. (a) What is the fundamental frequency of a
0.672-m-long tube, open at both ends, on a day
when the speed of sound is 344 m/s? (b) What is
the frequency of its second harmonic?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 789
17 • Problems & Exercises 771
52. A crude approximation of voice production is to 61. Based on the graph inFigure 17.34, what is the
consider the breathing passages and mouth to be threshold of hearing in decibels for frequencies of
a resonating tube closed at one end. (SeeFigure 60, 400, 1000, 4000, and 15,000 Hz? Note that
17.29.) (a) What is the fundamental frequency if many AC electrical appliances produce 60 Hz,
the tube is 0.240-m long, by taking air music is commonly 400 Hz, a reference frequency
temperature to be ? (b) What would this is 1000 Hz, your maximum sensitivity is near 4000
frequency become if the person replaced the air Hz, and many older TVs produce a 15,750 Hz
with helium? Assume the same temperature whine.
dependence for helium as for air. 62. What sound intensity levels must sounds of
53. (a) Students in a physics lab are asked to find the frequencies 60, 3000, and 8000 Hz have in order
length of an air column in a tube closed at one end to have the same loudness as a 40-dB sound of
that has a fundamental frequency of 256 Hz. They frequency 1000 Hz (that is, to have a loudness of
hold the tube vertically and fill it with water to the 40 phons)?
top, then lower the water while a 256-Hz tuning 63. What is the approximate sound intensity level in
fork is rung and listen for the first resonance. What decibels of a 600-Hz tone if it has a loudness of 20
is the air temperature if the resonance occurs for a phons? If it has a loudness of 70 phons?
length of 0.336 m? (b) At what length will they 64. (a) What are the loudnesses in phons of sounds
observe the second resonance (first overtone)? having frequencies of 200, 1000, 5000, and
54. What frequencies will a 1.80-m-long tube produce 10,000 Hz, if they are all at the same 60.0-dB
in the audible range at if: (a) The tube is sound intensity level? (b) If they are all at 110 dB?
closed at one end? (b) It is open at both ends? (c) If they are all at 20.0 dB?
65. Suppose a person has a 50-dB hearing loss at all
17.6Hearing frequencies. By how many factors of 10 will low-
intensity sounds need to be amplified to seem
55. The factor of in the range of intensities to
normal to this person? Note that smaller
which the ear can respond, from threshold to that
amplification is appropriate for more intense
causing damage after brief exposure, is truly
sounds to avoid further hearing damage.
remarkable. If you could measure distances over
66. If a woman needs an amplification of
the same range with a single instrument and the
times the threshold intensity to enable her to hear
smallest distance you could measure was 1 mm,
at all frequencies, what is her overall hearing loss
what would the largest be?
in dB? Note that smaller amplification is
56. The frequencies to which the ear responds vary by
appropriate for more intense sounds to avoid
a factor of . Suppose the speedometer on your
further damage to her hearing from levels above
car measured speeds differing by the same factor
90 dB.
of , and the greatest speed it reads is 90.0 mi/
67. (a) What is the intensity in watts per meter
h. What would be the slowest nonzero speed it
squared of a just barely audible 200-Hz sound? (b)
could read?
What is the intensity in watts per meter squared of
57. What are the closest frequencies to 500 Hz that an
a barely audible 4000-Hz sound?
average person can clearly distinguish as being
68. (a) Find the intensity in watts per meter squared of
different in frequency from 500 Hz? The sounds
a 60.0-Hz sound having a loudness of 60 phons.
are not present simultaneously.
(b) Find the intensity in watts per meter squared
58. Can the average person tell that a 2002-Hz sound
of a 10,000-Hz sound having a loudness of 60
has a different frequency than a 1999-Hz sound
phons.
without playing them simultaneously?
69. A person has a hearing threshold 10 dB above
59. If your radio is producing an average sound
normal at 100 Hz and 50 dB above normal at
intensity level of 85 dB, what is the next lowest
4000 Hz. How much more intense must a 100-Hz
sound intensity level that is clearly less intense?
tone be than a 4000-Hz tone if they are both
60. Can you tell that your roommate turned up the
barely audible to this person?
sound on the TV if its average sound intensity level
70. A child has a hearing loss of 60 dB near 5000 Hz,
goes from 70 to 73 dB?
due to noise exposure, and normal hearing
elsewhere. How much more intense is a 5000-Hz
tone than a 400-Hz tone if they are both barely
audible to the child?
PAGE: 790
772 17 • Problems & Exercises
71. What is the ratio of intensities of two sounds of 79. (a) Echo times are measured by diagnostic
identical frequency if the first is just barely ultrasound scanners to determine distances to
discernible as louder to a person than the second? reflecting surfaces in a patient. What is the
difference in echo times for tissues that are 3.50
17.7Ultrasound and 3.60 cm beneath the surface? (This difference
is the minimum resolving time for the scanner to
Unless otherwise indicated, for problems in this
see details as small as 0.100 cm, or 1.00 mm.
section, assume that the speed of sound through
Discrimination of smaller time differences is
human tissues is 1540 m/s.
needed to see smaller details.) (b) Discuss
72. What is the sound intensity level in decibels of whether the period of this ultrasound must be
ultrasound of intensity , used to smaller than the minimum time resolution. If so,
pulverize tissue during surgery? what is the minimum frequency of the ultrasound
73. Is 155-dB ultrasound in the range of intensities and is that out of the normal range for diagnostic
used for deep heating? Calculate the intensity of ultrasound?
this ultrasound and compare this intensity with 80. (a) How far apart are two layers of tissue that
values quoted in the text. produce echoes having round-trip times (used to
74. Find the sound intensity level in decibels of measure distances) that differ by ? (b)
ultrasound used in medical What minimum frequency must the ultrasound
diagnostics. have to see detail this small?
75. The time delay between transmission and the 81. (a) A bat uses ultrasound to find its way among
arrival of the reflected wave of a signal using trees. If this bat can detect echoes 1.00 ms apart,
ultrasound traveling through a piece of fat tissue what minimum distance between objects can it
was 0.13 ms. At what depth did this reflection detect? (b) Could this distance explain the
occur? difficulty that bats have finding an open door when
76. In the clinical use of ultrasound, transducers are they accidentally get into a house?
always coupled to the skin by a thin layer of gel or 82. A dolphin is able to tell in the dark that the
oil, replacing the air that would otherwise exist ultrasound echoes received from two sharks come
between the transducer and the skin. (a) Using the from two different objects only if the sharks are
values of acoustic impedance given inTable 17.5 separated by 3.50 m, one being that much farther
calculate the intensity reflection coefficient away than the other. (a) If the ultrasound has a
between transducer material and air. (b) Calculate frequency of 100 kHz, show this ability is not
the intensity reflection coefficient between limited by its wavelength. (b) If this ability is due
transducer material and gel (assuming for this to the dolphin’s ability to detect the arrival times
problem that its acoustic impedance is identical to of echoes, what is the minimum time difference
that of water). (c) Based on the results of your the dolphin can perceive?
calculations, explain why the gel is used. 83. A diagnostic ultrasound echo is reflected from
77. (a) Calculate the minimum frequency of moving blood and returns with a frequency 500 Hz
ultrasound that will allow you to see details as higher than its original 2.00 MHz. What is the
small as 0.250 mm in human tissue. (b) What is velocity of the blood? (Assume that the frequency
the effective depth to which this sound is effective of 2.00 MHz is accurate to seven significant figures
as a diagnostic probe? and 500 Hz is accurate to three significant
78. (a) Find the size of the smallest detail observable figures.)
in human tissue with 20.0-MHz ultrasound. (b) Is 84. Ultrasound reflected from an oncoming
its effective penetration depth great enough to bloodstream that is moving at 30.0 cm/s is mixed
examine the entire eye (about 3.00 cm is with the original frequency of 2.50 MHz to produce
needed)? (c) What is the wavelength of such beats. What is the beat frequency? (Assume that
ultrasound in air? the frequency of 2.50 MHz is accurate to seven
significant figures.)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 791
CHAPTER 18
Electric Charge and Electric Field
FIGURE18.1Static electricity from this plastic slide causes the child’s hair to stand on end. The sliding motion stripped electrons away
from the child’s body, leaving an excess of positive charges, which repel each other along each strand of hair. (credit: Ken Bosma/Wikimedia
Commons)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
18.1Static Electricity and Charge: Conservation of Charge
18.2Conductors and Insulators
18.3Coulomb’s Law
18.4Electric Field: Concept of a Field Revisited
18.5Electric Field Lines: Multiple Charges
18.6Electric Forces in Biology
18.7Conductors and Electric Fields in Static Equilibrium
18.8Applications of Electrostatics
INTRODUCTION TO ELECTRIC CHARGE AND ELECTRIC FIELD The image of American politician and scientist
Benjamin Franklin (1706–1790) flying a kite in a thunderstorm is familiar to every schoolchild. (SeeFigure 18.2.) In
this experiment, Franklin demonstrated a connection between lightning andstatic electricity. Sparks were drawn
from a key hung on a kite string during an electrical storm. These sparks were like those produced by static
electricity, such as the spark that jumps from your finger to a metal doorknob after you walk across a wool carpet.
What Franklin demonstrated in his dangerous experiment was a connection between phenomena on two different
scales: one the grand power of an electrical storm, the other an effect of more human proportions. Connections like
this one reveal the underlying unity of the laws of nature, an aspect we humans find particularly appealing.
PAGE: 792
774 18 • Electric Charge and Electric Field
FIGURE18.2When Benjamin Franklin demonstrated that lightning was related to static electricity, he made a connection that is now part
of the evidence that all directly experienced forces except the gravitational force are manifestations of the electromagnetic force.
Much has been written about Franklin. His experiments were only part of the life of a man who was a scientist,
inventor, revolutionary, statesman, and writer. Franklin’s experiments were not performed in isolation, nor were they
the only ones to reveal connections.
For example, the Italian scientist Luigi Galvani (1737–1798) performed a series of experiments in which static
electricity was used to stimulate contractions of leg muscles of dead frogs, an effect already known in humans
subjected to static discharges. But Galvani also found that if he joined two metal wires (say copper and zinc) end to
end and touched the other ends to muscles, he produced the same effect in frogs as static discharge. Alessandro
Volta (1745–1827), partly inspired by Galvani’s work, experimented with various combinations of metals and
developed the battery.
During the same era, other scientists made progress in discovering fundamental connections. The periodic table
was developed as the systematic properties of the elements were discovered. This influenced the development and
refinement of the concept of atoms as the basis of matter. Such submicroscopic descriptions of matter also help
explain a great deal more.
Atomic and molecular interactions, such as the forces of friction, cohesion, and adhesion, are now known to be
manifestations of theelectromagnetic force. Static electricity is just one aspect of the electromagnetic force, which
also includes moving electricity and magnetism.
All the macroscopic forces that we experience directly, such as the sensations of touch and the tension in a rope, are
due to the electromagnetic force, one of the four fundamental forces in nature. The gravitational force, another
fundamental force, is actually sensed through the electromagnetic interaction of molecules, such as between those
in our feet and those on the top of a bathroom scale. (The other two fundamental forces, the strong nuclear force
and the weak nuclear force, cannot be sensed on the human scale.)
This chapter begins the study of electromagnetic phenomena at a fundamental level. The next several chapters will
cover static electricity, moving electricity, and magnetism—collectively known as electromagnetism. In this chapter,
we begin with the study of electric phenomena due to charges that are at least temporarily stationary, called
electrostatics, or static electricity.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/18-introduction-to-electric-charge-
and-electric-field)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 793
18.1 • Static Electricity and Charge: Conservation of Charge 775
18.1 Static Electricity and Charge: Conservation of Charge
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define electric charge, and describe how the two types of charge interact.
• Describe three common situations that generate static electricity.
• State the law of conservation of charge.
FIGURE18.3Borneo amber was mined in Sabah, Malaysia, from shale-sandstone-mudstone veins. When a piece of amber is rubbed with a
piece of silk, the amber gains more electrons, giving it a net negative charge. At the same time, the silk, having lost electrons, becomes
positively charged. (credit: Sebakoamber, Wikimedia Commons)
What makes plastic wrap cling? Static electricity. Not only are applications of static electricity common these days,
its existence has been known since ancient times. The first record of its effects dates to ancient Greeks who noted
more than 500 years B.C. that polishing amber temporarily enabled it to attract bits of straw (seeFigure 18.3). The
very wordelectricderives from the Greek word for amber (electron).
Many of the characteristics of static electricity can be explored by rubbing things together. Rubbing creates the
spark you get from walking across a wool carpet, for example. Static cling generated in a clothes dryer and the
attraction of straw to recently polished amber also result from rubbing. Similarly, lightning results from air
movements under certain weather conditions. You can also rub a balloon on your hair, and the static electricity
created can then make the balloon cling to a wall. We also have to be cautious of static electricity, especially in dry
climates. When we pump gasoline, we are warned to discharge ourselves (after sliding across the seat) on a metal
surface before grabbing the gas nozzle. Attendants in hospital operating rooms must wear booties with a conductive
strip of aluminum foil on the bottoms to avoid creating sparks which may ignite flammable anesthesia gases
combined with the oxygen being used.
Some of the most basic characteristics of static electricity include:
• The effects of static electricity are explained by a physical quantity not previously introduced, called electric
charge.
• There are only two types of charge, one called positive and the other called negative.
• Like charges repel, whereas unlike charges attract.
• The force between charges decreases with distance.
How do we know there are two types ofelectric charge? When various materials are rubbed together in controlled
ways, certain combinations of materials always produce one type of charge on one material and the opposite type
on the other. By convention, we call one type of charge “positive”, and the other type “negative.” For example, when
glass is rubbed with silk, the glass becomes positively charged and the silk negatively charged. Since the glass and
silk have opposite charges, they attract one another like clothes that have rubbed together in a dryer. Two glass rods
rubbed with silk in this manner will repel one another, since each rod has positive charge on it. Similarly, two silk
cloths so rubbed will repel, since both cloths have negative charge.Figure 18.4shows how these simple materials
can be used to explore the nature of the force between charges.
PAGE: 794
776 18 • Electric Charge and Electric Field
FIGURE18.4A glass rod becomes positively charged when rubbed with silk, while the silk becomes negatively charged. (a) The glass rod is
attracted to the silk because their charges are opposite. (b) Two similarly charged glass rods repel. (c) Two similarly charged silk cloths
repel.
More sophisticated questions arise. Where do these charges come from? Can you create or destroy charge? Is there
a smallest unit of charge? Exactly how does the force depend on the amount of charge and the distance between
charges? Such questions obviously occurred to Benjamin Franklin and other early researchers, and they interest us
even today.
Charge Carried by Electrons and Protons
Franklin wrote in his letters and books that he could see the effects of electric charge but did not understand what
caused the phenomenon. Today we have the advantage of knowing that normal matter is made of atoms, and that
atoms contain positive and negative charges, usually in equal amounts.
Figure 18.5shows a simple model of an atom with negativeelectronsorbiting its positive nucleus. The nucleus is
positive due to the presence of positively chargedprotons. Nearly all charge in nature is due to electrons and
protons, which are two of the three building blocks of most matter. (The third is the neutron, which is neutral,
carrying no charge.) Other charge-carrying particles are observed in cosmic rays and nuclear decay, and are created
in particle accelerators. All but the electron and proton survive only a short time and are quite rare by comparison.
FIGURE18.5This simplified (and not to scale) view of an atom is called the planetary model of the atom. Negative electrons orbit a much
heavier positive nucleus, as the planets orbit the much heavier sun. There the similarity ends, because forces in the atom are
electromagnetic, whereas those in the planetary system are gravitational. Normal macroscopic amounts of matter contain immense
numbers of atoms and molecules and, hence, even greater numbers of individual negative and positive charges.
The charges of electrons and protons are identical in magnitude but opposite in sign. Furthermore, all charged
objects in nature are integral multiples of this basic quantity of charge, meaning that all charges are made of
combinations of a basic unit of charge. Usually, charges are formed by combinations of electrons and protons. The
magnitude of this basic charge is
18.1
The symbol is commonly used for charge and the subscript indicates the charge of a single electron (or proton).
The SI unit of charge is the coulomb (C). The number of protons needed to make a charge of 1.00 C is
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 795
18.1 • Static Electricity and Charge: Conservation of Charge 777
18.2
Similarly, electrons have a combined charge of −1.00 coulomb. Just as there is a smallest bit of an
element (an atom), there is a smallest bit of charge. There is no directly observed charge smaller than (see
Things Great and Small: The Submicroscopic Origin of Charge), and all observed charges are integral multiples of
.
Things Great and Small: The Submicroscopic Origin of Charge
With the exception of exotic, short-lived particles, all charge in nature is carried by electrons and protons.
Electrons carry the charge we have named negative. Protons carry an equal-magnitude charge that we call
positive. (SeeFigure 18.6.) Electron and proton charges are considered fundamental building blocks, since all
other charges are integral multiples of those carried by electrons and protons. Electrons and protons are also
two of the three fundamental building blocks of ordinary matter. The neutron is the third and has zero total
charge.
Figure 18.6shows a person touching a Van de Graaff generator and receiving excess positive charge. The expanded
view of a hair shows the existence of both types of charges but an excess of positive. The repulsion of these positive
like charges causes the strands of hair to repel other strands of hair and to stand up. The further blowup shows an
artist’s conception of an electron and a proton perhaps found in an atom in a strand of hair.
FIGURE18.6When this person touches a Van de Graaff generator, some electrons are attracted to the generator, resulting in an excess of
positive charge, causing her hair to stand on end. The charges in one hair are shown. An artist’s conception of an electron and a proton
illustrate the particles carrying the negative and positive charges. We cannot really see these particles with visible light because they are so
small (the electron seems to be an infinitesimal point), but we know a great deal about their measurable properties, such as the charges
they carry.
The electron seems to have no substructure; in contrast, when the substructure of protons is explored by scattering
extremely energetic electrons from them, it appears that there are point-like particles inside the proton. These sub-
particles, named quarks, have never been directly observed, but they are believed to carry fractional charges as
seen inFigure 18.7. Charges on electrons and protons and all other directly observable particles are unitary, but
these quark substructures carry charges of either or . There are continuing attempts to observe fractional
charge directly and to learn of the properties of quarks, which are perhaps the ultimate substructure of matter.
PAGE: 796
778 18 • Electric Charge and Electric Field
FIGURE18.7Artist’s conception of fractional quark charges inside a proton. A group of three quark charges add up to the single positive
charge on the proton: .
Separation of Charge in Atoms
Charges in atoms and molecules can be separated—for example, by rubbing materials together. Some atoms and
molecules have a greater affinity for electrons than others and will become negatively charged by close contact in
rubbing, leaving the other material positively charged. (SeeFigure 18.8.) Positive charge can similarly be induced by
rubbing. Methods other than rubbing can also separate charges. Batteries, for example, use combinations of
substances that interact in such a way as to separate charges. Chemical interactions may transfer negative charge
from one substance to the other, making one battery terminal negative and leaving the first one positive.
FIGURE18.8When materials are rubbed together, charges can be separated, particularly if one material has a greater affinity for electrons
than another. (a) Both the amber and cloth are originally neutral, with equal positive and negative charges. Only a tiny fraction of the
charges are involved, and only a few of them are shown here. (b) When rubbed together, some negative charge is transferred to the amber,
leaving the cloth with a net positive charge. (c) When separated, the amber and cloth now have net charges, but the absolute value of the
net positive and negative charges will be equal.
No charge is actually created or destroyed when charges are separated as we have been discussing. Rather, existing
charges are moved about. In fact, in all situations the total amount of charge is always constant. This universally
obeyed law of nature is called thelaw of conservation of charge.
Law of Conservation of Charge
Total charge is constant in any process.
In more exotic situations, such as in particle accelerators, mass, , can be created from energy in the amount
. Sometimes, the created mass is charged, such as when an electron is created. Whenever a charged
particle is created, another having an opposite charge is always created along with it, so that the total charge
created is zero. Usually, the two particles are “matter-antimatter” counterparts. For example, an antielectron would
usually be created at the same time as an electron. The antielectron has a positive charge (it is called a positron),
and so the total charge created is zero. (SeeFigure 18.9.) All particles have antimatter counterparts with opposite
signs. When matter and antimatter counterparts are brought together, they completely annihilate one another. By
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 797
18.1 • Static Electricity and Charge: Conservation of Charge 779
annihilate, we mean that the mass of the two particles is converted to energyE, again obeying the relationship
. Since the two particles have equal and opposite charge, the total charge is zero before and after the
annihilation; thus, total charge is conserved.
Making Connections: Conservation Laws
Only a limited number of physical quantities are universally conserved. Charge is one—energy, momentum, and
angular momentum are others. Because they are conserved, these physical quantities are used to explain more
phenomena and form more connections than other, less basic quantities. We find that conserved quantities give
us great insight into the rules followed by nature and hints to the organization of nature. Discoveries of
conservation laws have led to further discoveries, such as the weak nuclear force and the quark substructure of
protons and other particles.
FIGURE18.9(a) When enough energy is present, it can be converted into matter. Here the matter created is an electron–antielectron pair. (
is the electron’s mass.) The total charge before and after this event is zero. (b) When matter and antimatter collide, they annihilate each
other; the total charge is conserved at zero before and after the annihilation.
The law of conservation of charge is absolute—it has never been observed to be violated. Charge, then, is a special
physical quantity, joining a very short list of other quantities in nature that are always conserved. Other conserved
quantities include energy, momentum, and angular momentum.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Balloons and Static Electricity
Why does a balloon stick to your sweater? Rub a balloon on a sweater, then let go of the balloon and it flies over and
sticks to the sweater. View the charges in the sweater, balloons, and the wall.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/18-1-static-electricity-and-charge-
conservation-of-charge)
PAGE: 798
780 18 • Electric Charge and Electric Field
18.2 Conductors and Insulators
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define conductor and insulator, explain the difference, and give examples of each.
• Describe three methods for charging an object.
• Explain what happens to an electric force as you move farther from the source.
• Define polarization.
FIGURE18.10This power adapter uses metal wires and connectors to conduct electricity from the wall socket to a laptop computer. The
conducting wires allow electrons to move freely through the cables, which are shielded by rubber and plastic. These materials act as
insulators that don’t allow electric charge to escape outward. (credit: Evan-Amos, Wikimedia Commons)
Some substances, such as metals and salty water, allow charges to move through them with relative ease. Some of
the electrons in metals and similar conductors are not bound to individual atoms or sites in the material. Thesefree
electronscan move through the material much as air moves through loose sand. Any substance that has free
electrons and allows charge to move relatively freely through it is called aconductor. The moving electrons may
collide with fixed atoms and molecules, losing some energy, but they can move in a conductor. Superconductors
allow the movement of charge without any loss of energy. Salty water and other similar conducting materials contain
free ions that can move through them. An ion is an atom or molecule having a positive or negative (nonzero) total
charge. In other words, the total number of electrons is not equal to the total number of protons.
Other substances, such as glass, do not allow charges to move through them. These are calledinsulators. Electrons
and ions in insulators are bound in the structure and cannot move easily—as much as times more slowly than
in conductors. Pure water and dry table salt are insulators, for example, whereas molten salt and salty water are
conductors.
FIGURE18.11An electroscope is a favorite instrument in physics demonstrations and student laboratories. It is typically made with gold
foil leaves hung from a (conducting) metal stem and is insulated from the room air in a glass-walled container. (a) A positively charged glass
rod is brought near the tip of the electroscope, attracting electrons to the top and leaving a net positive charge on the leaves. Like charges in
the light flexible gold leaves repel, separating them. (b) When the rod is touched against the ball, electrons are attracted and transferred,
reducing the net charge on the glass rod but leaving the electroscope positively charged. (c) The excess charges are evenly distributed in
the stem and leaves of the electroscope once the glass rod is removed.
Charging by Contact
Figure 18.11shows an electroscope being charged by touching it with a positively charged glass rod. Because the
glass rod is an insulator, it must actually touch the electroscope to transfer charge to or from it. (Note that the extra
positive charges reside on the surface of the glass rod as a result of rubbing it with silk before starting the
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 799
18.2 • Conductors and Insulators 781
experiment.) Since only electrons move in metals, we see that they are attracted to the top of the electroscope.
There, some are transferred to the positive rod by touch, leaving the electroscope with a net positive charge.
Electrostatic repulsionin the leaves of the charged electroscope separates them. The electrostatic force has a
horizontal component that results in the leaves moving apart as well as a vertical component that is balanced by the
gravitational force. Similarly, the electroscope can be negatively charged by contact with a negatively charged
object.
Charging by Induction
It is not necessary to transfer excess charge directly to an object in order to charge it.Figure 18.12shows a method
ofinductionwherein a charge is created in a nearby object, without direct contact. Here we see two neutral metal
spheres in contact with one another but insulated from the rest of the world. A positively charged rod is brought
near one of them, attracting negative charge to that side, leaving the other sphere positively charged.
This is an example of inducedpolarizationof neutral objects. Polarization is the separation of charges in an object
that remains neutral. If the spheres are now separated (before the rod is pulled away), each sphere will have a net
charge. Note that the object closest to the charged rod receives an opposite charge when charged by induction. Note
also that no charge is removed from the charged rod, so that this process can be repeated without depleting the
supply of excess charge.
Another method of charging by induction is shown inFigure 18.13. The neutral metal sphere is polarized when a
charged rod is brought near it. The sphere is then grounded, meaning that a conducting wire is run from the sphere
to the ground. Since the earth is large and most ground is a good conductor, it can supply or accept excess charge
easily. In this case, electrons are attracted to the sphere through a wire called the ground wire, because it supplies a
conducting path to the ground. The ground connection is broken before the charged rod is removed, leaving the
sphere with an excess charge opposite to that of the rod. Again, an opposite charge is achieved when charging by
induction and the charged rod loses none of its excess charge.
FIGURE18.12Charging by induction. (a) Two uncharged or neutral metal spheres are in contact with each other but insulated from the rest
of the world. (b) A positively charged glass rod is brought near the sphere on the left, attracting negative charge and leaving the other
PAGE: 800
782 18 • Electric Charge and Electric Field
sphere positively charged. (c) The spheres are separated before the rod is removed, thus separating negative and positive charge. (d) The
spheres retain net charges after the inducing rod is removed—without ever having been touched by a charged object.
FIGURE18.13Charging by induction, using a ground connection. (a) A positively charged rod is brought near a neutral metal sphere,
polarizing it. (b) The sphere is grounded, allowing electrons to be attracted from the earth’s ample supply. (c) The ground connection is
broken. (d) The positive rod is removed, leaving the sphere with an induced negative charge.
FIGURE18.14Both positive and negative objects attract a neutral object by polarizing its molecules. (a) A positive object brought near a
neutral insulator polarizes its molecules. There is a slight shift in the distribution of the electrons orbiting the molecule, with unlike charges
being brought nearer and like charges moved away. Since the electrostatic force decreases with distance, there is a net attraction. (b) A
negative object produces the opposite polarization, but again attracts the neutral object. (c) The same effect occurs for a conductor; since
the unlike charges are closer, there is a net attraction.
Neutral objects can be attracted to any charged object. The pieces of straw attracted to polished amber are neutral,
for example. If you run a plastic comb through your hair, the charged comb can pick up neutral pieces of paper.
Figure 18.14shows how the polarization of atoms and molecules in neutral objects results in their attraction to a
charged object.
When a charged rod is brought near a neutral substance, an insulator in this case, the distribution of charge in atoms
and molecules is shifted slightly. Opposite charge is attracted nearer the external charged rod, while like charge is
repelled. Since the electrostatic force decreases with distance, the repulsion of like charges is weaker than the
attraction of unlike charges, and so there is a net attraction. Thus a positively charged glass rod attracts neutral
pieces of paper, as will a negatively charged rubber rod. Some molecules, like water, are polar molecules. Polar
molecules have a natural or inherent separation of charge, although they are neutral overall. Polar molecules are
particularly affected by other charged objects and show greater polarization effects than molecules with naturally
uniform charge distributions.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 801
18.3 • Coulomb’s Law 783
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Can you explain the attraction of water to the charged rod in the figure below?
FIGURE18.15
Solution
Water molecules are polarized, giving them slightly positive and slightly negative sides. This makes water even more
susceptible to a charged rod’s attraction. In addition, tap water contains dissolved ions (positive and negative
charges). As the water flows downward, due to the force of gravity, the charged conductor exerts a net attraction to
the opposite charges in the stream of water, pulling it closer.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
John Travoltage
Make sparks fly with John Travoltage. Wiggle Johnnie's foot and he picks up charges from the carpet. Bring his hand
close to the door knob and get rid of the excess charge.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/18-2-conductors-and-insulators)
18.3 Coulomb’s Law
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• State Coulomb’s law in terms of how the electrostatic force changes with the distance between two
objects.
• Calculate the electrostatic force between two charged point forces, such as electrons or protons.
• Compare the electrostatic force to the gravitational attraction for a proton and an electron; for a human
and the Earth.
PAGE: 802
784 18 • Electric Charge and Electric Field
FIGURE18.16This NASA image of Arp 87 shows the result of a strong gravitational attraction between two galaxies. In contrast, at the
subatomic level, the electrostatic attraction between two objects, such as an electron and a proton, is far greater than their mutual
attraction due to gravity. (credit: NASA/HST)
Through the work of scientists in the late 18th century, the main features of theelectrostatic force—the existence
of two types of charge, the observation that like charges repel, unlike charges attract, and the decrease of force with
distance—were eventually refined, and expressed as a mathematical formula. The mathematical formula for the
electrostatic force is calledCoulomb’s lawafter the French physicist Charles Coulomb (1736–1806), who
performed experiments and first proposed a formula to calculate it.
Coulomb’s Law
18.3
Coulomb’s law calculates the magnitude of the force between two point charges, and , separated by a
distance . In SI units, the constant is equal to
18.4
The electrostatic force is a vector quantity and is expressed in units of newtons. The force is understood to be
along the line joining the two charges. (SeeFigure 18.17.)
Although the formula for Coulomb’s law is simple, it was no mean task to prove it. The experiments Coulomb did,
with the primitive equipment then available, were difficult. Modern experiments have verified Coulomb’s law to
great precision. For example, it has been shown that the force is inversely proportional to distance between two
objects squared to an accuracy of 1 part in . No exceptions have ever been found, even at the small
distances within the atom.
FIGURE18.17The magnitude of the electrostatic force between point charges and separated by a distance is given by Coulomb’s
law. Note that Newton’s third law (every force exerted creates an equal and opposite force) applies as usual—the force on is equal in
magnitude and opposite in direction to the force it exerts on . (a) Like charges. (b) Unlike charges.
EXAMPLE 18.1
How Strong is the Coulomb Force Relative to the Gravitational Force?
Compare the electrostatic force between an electron and proton separated by with the
gravitational force between them. This distance is their average separation in a hydrogen atom.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 803
18.3 • Coulomb’s Law 785
Strategy
To compare the two forces, we first compute the electrostatic force using Coulomb’s law, . We then
calculate the gravitational force using Newton’s universal law of gravitation. Finally, we take a ratio to see how the
forces compare in magnitude.
Solution
Entering the given and known information about the charges and separation of the electron and proton into the
expression of Coulomb’s law yields
18.5
18.6
Thus the Coulomb force is
18.7
The charges are opposite in sign, so this is an attractive force. This is a very large force for an electron—it would
cause an acceleration of (verification is left as an end-of-section problem).The gravitational force
is given by Newton’s law of gravitation as:
18.8
where . Here and represent the electron and proton masses, which can be
found in the appendices. Entering values for the knowns yields
18.9
This is also an attractive force, although it is traditionally shown as positive since gravitational force is always
attractive. The ratio of the magnitude of the electrostatic force to gravitational force in this case is, thus,
18.10
Discussion
This is a remarkably large ratio! Note that this will be the ratio of electrostatic force to gravitational force for an
electron and a proton at any distance (taking the ratio before entering numerical values shows that the distance
cancels). This ratio gives some indication of just how much larger the Coulomb force is than the gravitational force
between two of the most common particles in nature.
As the example implies, gravitational force is completely negligible on a small scale, where the interactions of
individual charged particles are important. On a large scale, such as between the Earth and a person, the reverse is
true. Most objects are nearly electrically neutral, and so attractive and repulsiveCoulomb forcesnearly cancel.
Gravitational force on a large scale dominates interactions between large objects because it is always attractive,
while Coulomb forces tend to cancel.
PAGE: 804
786 18 • Electric Charge and Electric Field
18.4 Electric Field: Concept of a Field Revisited
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe a force field and calculate the strength of an electric field due to a point charge.
• Calculate the force exerted on a test charge by an electric field.
• Explain the relationship between electrical force (F) on a test charge and electrical field strength (E).
Contact forces, such as between a baseball and a bat, are explained on the small scale by the interaction of the
charges in atoms and molecules in close proximity. They interact through forces that include theCoulomb force.
Action at a distance is a force between objects that are not close enough for their atoms to “touch.” That is, they are
separated by more than a few atomic diameters.
For example, a charged rubber comb attracts neutral bits of paper from a distance via the Coulomb force. It is very
useful to think of an object being surrounded in space by aforce field. The force field carries the force to another
object (called a test object) some distance away.
Concept of a Field
A field is a way of conceptualizing and mapping the force that surrounds any object and acts on another object at a
distance without apparent physical connection. For example, the gravitational field surrounding the earth (and all
other masses) represents the gravitational force that would be experienced if another mass were placed at a given
point within the field.
In the same way, the Coulomb force field surrounding any charge extends throughout space. Using Coulomb’s law,
, its magnitude is given by the equation , for apoint charge(a particle having a
charge ) acting on atest charge at a distance (seeFigure 18.18). Both the magnitude and direction of the
Coulomb force field depend on and the test charge .
FIGURE18.18The Coulomb force field due to a positive charge is shown acting on two different charges. Both charges are the same
distance from . (a) Since is positive, the force acting on it is repulsive. (b) The charge is negative and greater in magnitude than
, and so the force acting on it is attractive and stronger than . The Coulomb force field is thus not unique at any point in space,
because it depends on the test charges and as well as the charge .
To simplify things, we would prefer to have a field that depends only on and not on the test charge . The electric
field is defined in such a manner that it represents only the charge creating it and is unique at every point in space.
Specifically, the electric field is defined to be the ratio of the Coulomb force to the test charge:
18.11
where is the electrostatic force (or Coulomb force) exerted on a positive test charge . It is understood that is in
the same direction as . It is also assumed that is so small that it does not alter the charge distribution creating
the electric field. The units of electric field are newtons per coulomb (N/C). If the electric field is known, then the
electrostatic force on any charge is simply obtained by multiplying charge times electric field, or . Consider
the electric field due to a point charge . According to Coulomb’s law, the force it exerts on a test charge is
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 805
18.4 • Electric Field: Concept of a Field Revisited 787
. Thus the magnitude of the electric field, , for a point charge is
18.12
Since the test charge cancels, we see that
18.13
The electric field is thus seen to depend only on the charge and the distance ; it is completely independent of the
test charge .
EXAMPLE 18.2
Calculating the Electric Field of a Point Charge
Calculate the strength and direction of the electric field due to a point charge of 2.00 nC (nano-Coulombs) at a
distance of 5.00 mm from the charge.
Strategy
We can find the electric field created by a point charge by using the equation .
Solution
Here C and m. Entering those values into the above equation gives
18.14
Discussion
Thiselectric field strengthis the same at any point 5.00 mm away from the charge that creates the field. It is
positive, meaning that it has a direction pointing away from the charge .
EXAMPLE 18.3
Calculating the Force Exerted on a Point Charge by an Electric Field
What force does the electric field found in the previous example exert on a point charge of ?
Strategy
Since we know the electric field strength and the charge in the field, the force on that charge can be calculated using
the definition of electric field rearranged to .
Solution
The magnitude of the force on a charge exerted by a field of strength N/C is thus,
18.15
Because is negative, the force is directed opposite to the direction of the field.
PAGE: 806
788 18 • Electric Charge and Electric Field
Discussion
The force is attractive, as expected for unlike charges. (The field was created by a positive charge and here acts on a
negative charge.) The charges in this example are typical of common static electricity, and the modest attractive
force obtained is similar to forces experienced in static cling and similar situations.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Electric Field of Dreams
Play ball! Add charges to the Field of Dreams and see how they react to the electric field. Turn on a background
electric field and adjust the direction and magnitude.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/l/02electric_field_dreams).
18.5 Electric Field Lines: Multiple Charges
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Calculate the total force (magnitude and direction) exerted on a test charge from more than one charge
• Describe an electric field diagram of a positive point charge; of a negative point charge with twice the
magnitude of positive charge
• Draw the electric field lines between two points of the same charge; between two points of opposite
charge.
Drawings using lines to representelectric fieldsaround charged objects are very useful in visualizing field strength
and direction. Since the electric field has both magnitude and direction, it is a vector. Like allvectors, the electric
field can be represented by an arrow that has length proportional to its magnitude and that points in the correct
direction. (We have used arrows extensively to represent force vectors, for example.)
Figure 18.19shows two pictorial representations of the same electric field created by a positive point charge .
Figure 18.19(b) shows the standard representation using continuous lines.Figure 18.19(a) shows numerous
individual arrows with each arrow representing the force on a test charge . Field lines are essentially a map of
infinitesimal force vectors.
FIGURE18.19Two equivalent representations of the electric field due to a positive charge . (a) Arrows representing the electric field’s
magnitude and direction. (b) In the standard representation, the arrows are replaced by continuous field lines having the same direction at
any point as the electric field. The closeness of the lines is directly related to the strength of the electric field. A test charge placed
anywhere will feel a force in the direction of the field line; this force will have a strength proportional to the density of the lines (being
greater near the charge, for example).
Note that the electric field is defined for a positive test charge , so that the field lines point away from a positive
charge and toward a negative charge. (SeeFigure 18.20.) The electric field strength is exactly proportional to the
number of field lines per unit area, since the magnitude of the electric field for a point charge is and
area is proportional to . This pictorial representation, in which field lines represent the direction and their
closeness (that is, their areal density or the number of lines crossing a unit area) represents strength, is used for all
fields: electrostatic, gravitational, magnetic, and others.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 807
18.5 • Electric Field Lines: Multiple Charges 789
FIGURE18.20The electric field surrounding three different point charges. (a) A positive charge. (b) A negative charge of equal magnitude.
(c) A larger negative charge.
In many situations, there are multiple charges. The total electric field created by multiple charges is the vector sum
of the individual fields created by each charge. The following example shows how to add electric field vectors.
EXAMPLE 18.4
Adding Electric Fields
Find the magnitude and direction of the total electric field due to the two point charges, and , at the origin of
the coordinate system as shown inFigure 18.21.
FIGURE18.21The electric fields and at the origin O add to .
Strategy
Since the electric field is a vector (having magnitude and direction), we add electric fields with the same vector
techniques used for other types of vectors. We first must find the electric field due to each charge at the point of
interest, which is the origin of the coordinate system (O) in this instance. We pretend that there is a positive test
charge, , at point O, which allows us to determine the direction of the fields and . Once those fields are
found, the total field can be determined usingvector addition.
Solution
The electric field strength at the origin due to is labeled and is calculated:
18.16
Similarly, is
18.17
Four digits have been retained in this solution to illustrate that is exactly twice the magnitude of . Now arrows
PAGE: 808
790 18 • Electric Charge and Electric Field
are drawn to represent the magnitudes and directions of and . (SeeFigure 18.21.) The direction of the electric
field is that of the force on a positive charge so both arrows point directly away from the positive charges that create
them. The arrow for is exactly twice the length of that for . The arrows form a right triangle in this case and
can be added using the Pythagorean theorem. The magnitude of the total field is
18.18
The direction is
18.19
or above thex-axis.
Discussion
In cases where the electric field vectors to be added are not perpendicular, vector components or graphical
techniques can be used. The total electric field found in this example is the total electric field at only one point in
space. To find the total electric field due to these two charges over an entire region, the same technique must be
repeated for each point in the region. This impossibly lengthy task (there are an infinite number of points in space)
can be avoided by calculating the total field at representative points and using some of the unifying features noted
next.
Figure 18.22shows how the electric field from two point charges can be drawn by finding the total field at
representative points and drawing electric field lines consistent with those points. While the electric fields from
multiple charges are more complex than those of single charges, some simple features are easily noticed.
For example, the field is weaker between like charges, as shown by the lines being farther apart in that region. (This
is because the fields from each charge exert opposing forces on any charge placed between them.) (SeeFigure
18.22andFigure 18.23(a).) Furthermore, at a great distance from two like charges, the field becomes identical to
the field from a single, larger charge.
Figure 18.23(b) shows the electric field of two unlike charges. The field is stronger between the charges. In that
region, the fields from each charge are in the same direction, and so their strengths add. The field of two unlike
charges is weak at large distances, because the fields of the individual charges are in opposite directions and so
their strengths subtract. At very large distances, the field of two unlike charges looks like that of a smaller single
charge.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 809
18.5 • Electric Field Lines: Multiple Charges 791
FIGURE18.22Two positive point charges and produce the resultant electric field shown. The field is calculated at representative
points and then smooth field lines drawn following the rules outlined in the text.
FIGURE18.23(a) Two negative charges produce the fields shown. It is very similar to the field produced by two positive charges, except
that the directions are reversed. The field is clearly weaker between the charges. The individual forces on a test charge in that region are in
opposite directions. (b) Two opposite charges produce the field shown, which is stronger in the region between the charges.
We use electric field lines to visualize and analyze electric fields (the lines are a pictorial tool, not a physical entity in
themselves). The properties of electric field lines for any charge distribution can be summarized as follows:
1. Field lines must begin on positive charges and terminate on negative charges, or at infinity in the hypothetical
case of isolated charges.
2. The number of field lines leaving a positive charge or entering a negative charge is proportional to the
magnitude of the charge.
3. The strength of the field is proportional to the closeness of the field lines—more precisely, it is proportional to
the number of lines per unit area perpendicular to the lines.
4. The direction of the electric field is tangent to the field line at any point in space.
5. Field lines can never cross.
The last property means that the field is unique at any point. The field line represents the direction of the field; so if
they crossed, the field would have two directions at that location (an impossibility if the field is unique).
PAGE: 810
792 18 • Electric Charge and Electric Field
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Charges and Fields
Move point charges around on the playing field and then view the electric field, voltages, equipotential lines, and
more. It's colorful, it's dynamic, it's free.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/18-5-electric-field-lines-multiple-
charges)
18.6 Electric Forces in Biology
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe how a water molecule is polar.
• Explain electrostatic screening by a water molecule within a living cell.
Classical electrostatics has an important role to play in modern molecular biology. Large molecules such as proteins,
nucleic acids, and so on—so important to life—are usually electrically charged. DNA itself is highly charged; it is the
electrostatic force that not only holds the molecule together but gives the molecule structure and strength.Figure
18.24is a schematic of the DNA double helix.
FIGURE18.24DNA is a highly charged molecule. The DNA double helix shows the two coiled strands each containing a row of nitrogenous
bases, which “code” the genetic information needed by a living organism. The strands are connected by bonds between pairs of bases.
While pairing combinations between certain bases are fixed (C-G and A-T), the sequence of nucleotides in the strand varies. (credit: Jerome
Walker)
The four nucleotide bases are given the symbols A (adenine), C (cytosine), G (guanine), and T (thymine). The order of
the four bases varies in each strand, but the pairing between bases is always the same. C and G are always paired
and A and T are always paired, which helps to preserve the order of bases in cell division (mitosis) so as to pass on
the correct genetic information. Since the Coulomb force drops with distance ( ), the distances between the
base pairs must be small enough that the electrostatic force is sufficient to hold them together.
DNA is a highly charged molecule, with about (fundamental charge) per m. The distance separating
the two strands that make up the DNA structure is about 1 nm, while the distance separating the individual atoms
within each base is about 0.3 nm.
One might wonder why electrostatic forces do not play a larger role in biology than they do if we have so many
charged molecules. The reason is that the electrostatic force is “diluted” due toscreeningbetween molecules. This
is due to the presence of other charges in the cell.
Polarity of Water Molecules
The best example of this charge screening is the water molecule, represented as . Water is a stronglypolar
molecule. Its 10 electrons (8 from the oxygen atom and 2 from the two hydrogen atoms) tend to remain closer to
the oxygen nucleus than the hydrogen nuclei. This creates two centers of equal and opposite charges—what is called
adipole, as illustrated inFigure 18.25. The magnitude of the dipole is called the dipole moment.
These two centers of charge will terminate some of the electric field lines coming from a free charge, as on a DNA
molecule. This results in a reduction in the strength of theCoulomb interaction. One might say that screening
makes the Coulomb force a short range force rather than long range.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 811
18.7 • Conductors and Electric Fields in Static Equilibrium 793
Cell Membranes
Other ions of importance in biology that can reduce or screen Coulomb interactions are and and .
These ions are located both inside and outside of living cells. The movement of these ions through cell membranes
is crucial to the motion of nerve impulses through nerve axons.
Recent studies of electrostatics in biology seem to show that electric fields in cells can be extended over larger
distances, in spite of screening, by “microtubules” within the cell. These microtubules are hollow tubes composed
of proteins that guide the movement of chromosomes when cells divide, the motion of other organisms within the
cell, and provide mechanisms for motion of some cells (as motors).
FIGURE18.25This schematic shows water ( ) as a polar molecule. Unequal sharing of electrons between the oxygen (O) and hydrogen
(H) atoms leads to a net separation of positive and negative charge—forming a dipole. The symbols and indicate that the oxygen side
of the molecule tends to be more negative, while the hydrogen ends tend to be more positive. This leads to an attraction of opposite
charges between molecules.
You are likely familiar with the role of electrical signals in nerve conduction and the importance of charges in cardiac
and related activity. Changes in electrical properties are also essential in core biological processes. Ernest Everett
Just, whose expertise in understanding and handling egg cells led to a number of critical experimental discoveries,
investigated the role of the cell membrane in reproductive fertilization. In one key experiment, Just established that
the egg membrane undergoes a depolarizing "wave of negativity" the moment it fuses with a sperm cell. This change
in charge is now known as the "fast block" that ensures that only one sperm cell fuses with an egg cell and is critical
for embryonic development.
Bioelectricity and Wound Healing
Just as electrical forces drive activities in healthy cells and systems, they are also critical in damaged ones.
Scientists have long known that injuries or infections are managed by the body through various responses, including
increased white blood cell concentrations, swelling, and tissue repair. For example, human cells damaged by
wounds heal through a complex process. But what triggers it?
Physicists and biologists working together at Vanderbilt University used an ultra-precise laser to uncover the
processes organisms use to repair damage. Lead researchers Andrea Page-Degraw and Shane Hutson and study
author Erica Shannon discovered that immediately upon damage, cells release calcium ions and eventually other
molecules, driving an electrochemical response that initiates the healing process. Shannon notes that different
types of damage lead to different chemical releases, demonstrating how organisms may initiate specific responses
to best address the injury.
While far more research is required to understand the triggering and response method, other research indicates that
bioelectricity is highly involved in wound healing. Several studies have indicated that precise and low-level electrical
stimulation of wounds (such as those from surgeries) leads to faster healing. While the mechanisms are not fully
understood, electrical stimulation is a growing area of research and practice in medicine.
18.7 Conductors and Electric Fields in Static Equilibrium
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• List the three properties of a conductor in electrostatic equilibrium.
• Explain the effect of an electric field on free charges in a conductor.
• Explain why no electric field may exist inside a conductor.
• Describe the electric field surrounding Earth.
• Explain what happens to an electric field applied to an irregular conductor.
• Describe how a lightning rod works.
• Explain how a metal car may protect passengers inside from the dangerous electric fields caused by a
downed line touching the car.
PAGE: 812
794 18 • Electric Charge and Electric Field
Conductorscontainfree chargesthat move easily. When excess charge is placed on a conductor or the conductor is
put into a static electric field, charges in the conductor quickly respond to reach a steady state calledelectrostatic
equilibrium.
Figure 18.26shows the effect of an electric field on free charges in a conductor. The free charges move until the
field is perpendicular to the conductor’s surface. There can be no component of the field parallel to the surface in
electrostatic equilibrium, since, if there were, it would produce further movement of charge. A positive free charge is
shown, but free charges can be either positive or negative and are, in fact, negative in metals. The motion of a
positive charge is equivalent to the motion of a negative charge in the opposite direction.
FIGURE18.26When an electric field is applied to a conductor, free charges inside the conductor move until the field is perpendicular to
the surface. (a) The electric field is a vector quantity, with both parallel and perpendicular components. The parallel component ( ) exerts
a force ( ) on the free charge , which moves the charge until . (b) The resulting field is perpendicular to the surface. The free
charge has been brought to the conductor’s surface, leaving electrostatic forces in equilibrium.
A conductor placed in anelectric fieldwill bepolarized.Figure 18.27shows the result of placing a neutral
conductor in an originally uniform electric field. The field becomes stronger near the conductor but entirely
disappears inside it.
FIGURE18.27This illustration shows a spherical conductor in static equilibrium with an originally uniform electric field. Free charges move
within the conductor, polarizing it, until the electric field lines are perpendicular to the surface. The field lines end on excess negative
charge on one section of the surface and begin again on excess positive charge on the opposite side. No electric field exists inside the
conductor, since free charges in the conductor would continue moving in response to any field until it was neutralized.
Misconception Alert: Electric Field inside a Conductor
Excess charges placed on a spherical conductor repel and move until they are evenly distributed, as shown in
Figure 18.28. Excess charge is forced to the surface until the field inside the conductor is zero. Outside the
conductor, the field is exactly the same as if the conductor were replaced by a point charge at its center equal to
the excess charge.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 813
18.7 • Conductors and Electric Fields in Static Equilibrium 795
FIGURE18.28The mutual repulsion of excess positive charges on a spherical conductor distributes them uniformly on its surface. The
resulting electric field is perpendicular to the surface and zero inside. Outside the conductor, the field is identical to that of a point
charge at the center equal to the excess charge.
Properties of a Conductor in Electrostatic Equilibrium
1. The electric field is zero inside a conductor.
2. Just outside a conductor, the electric field lines are perpendicular to its surface, ending or beginning on
charges on the surface.
3. Any excess charge resides entirely on the surface or surfaces of a conductor.
The properties of a conductor are consistent with the situations already discussed and can be used to analyze any
conductor in electrostatic equilibrium. This can lead to some interesting new insights, such as described below.
How can a very uniform electric field be created? Consider a system of two metal plates with opposite charges on
them, as shown inFigure 18.29. The properties of conductors in electrostatic equilibrium indicate that the electric
field between the plates will be uniform in strength and direction. Except near the edges, the excess charges
distribute themselves uniformly, producing field lines that are uniformly spaced (hence uniform in strength) and
perpendicular to the surfaces (hence uniform in direction, since the plates are flat). The edge effects are less
important when the plates are close together.
FIGURE18.29Two metal plates with equal, but opposite, excess charges. The field between them is uniform in strength and direction
except near the edges. One use of such a field is to produce uniform acceleration of charges between the plates, such as in the electron gun
of a TV tube.
Earth’s Electric Field
A near uniform electric field of approximately 150 N/C, directed downward, surrounds Earth, with the magnitude
increasing slightly as we get closer to the surface. What causes the electric field? At around 100 km above the
surface of Earth we have a layer of charged particles, called theionosphere. The ionosphere is responsible for a
range of phenomena including the electric field surrounding Earth. In fair weather the ionosphere is positive and the
Earth largely negative, maintaining the electric field (Figure 18.30(a)).
In storm conditions clouds form and localized electric fields can be larger and reversed in direction (Figure
18.30(b)). The exact charge distributions depend on the local conditions, and variations ofFigure 18.30(b) are
possible.
If the electric field is sufficiently large, the insulating properties of the surrounding material break down and it
becomes conducting. For air this occurs at around N/C. Air ionizes ions and electrons recombine, and we
PAGE: 814
796 18 • Electric Charge and Electric Field
get discharge in the form of lightning sparks and corona discharge.
FIGURE18.30Earth’s electric field. (a) Fair weather field. Earth and the ionosphere (a layer of charged particles) are both conductors. They
produce a uniform electric field of about 150 N/C. (credit: D. H. Parks) (b) Storm fields. In the presence of storm clouds, the local electric
fields can be larger. At very high fields, the insulating properties of the air break down and lightning can occur. (credit: Jan-Joost Verhoef)
Electric Fields on Uneven Surfaces
So far we have considered excess charges on a smooth, symmetrical conductor surface. What happens if a
conductor has sharp corners or is pointed? Excess charges on a nonuniform conductor become concentrated at the
sharpest points. Additionally, excess charge may move on or off the conductor at the sharpest points.
To see how and why this happens, consider the charged conductor inFigure 18.31. The electrostatic repulsion of
like charges is most effective in moving them apart on the flattest surface, and so they become least concentrated
there. This is because the forces between identical pairs of charges at either end of the conductor are identical, but
the components of the forces parallel to the surfaces are different. The component parallel to the surface is greatest
on the flattest surface and, hence, more effective in moving the charge.
The same effect is produced on a conductor by an externally applied electric field, as seen inFigure 18.31(c). Since
the field lines must be perpendicular to the surface, more of them are concentrated on the most curved parts.
FIGURE18.31Excess charge on a nonuniform conductor becomes most concentrated at the location of greatest curvature. (a) The forces
between identical pairs of charges at either end of the conductor are identical, but the components of the forces parallel to the surface are
different. It is that moves the charges apart once they have reached the surface. (b) is smallest at the more pointed end, the charges
are left closer together, producing the electric field shown. (c) An uncharged conductor in an originally uniform electric field is polarized,
with the most concentrated charge at its most pointed end.
Applications of Conductors
On a very sharply curved surface, such as shown inFigure 18.32, the charges are so concentrated at the point that
the resulting electric field can be great enough to remove them from the surface. This can be useful.
Lightning rods work best when they are most pointed. The large charges created in storm clouds induce an opposite
charge on a building that can result in a lightning bolt hitting the building. The induced charge is bled away
continually by a lightning rod, preventing the more dramatic lightning strike.
Of course, we sometimes wish to prevent the transfer of charge rather than to facilitate it. In that case, the
conductor should be very smooth and have as large a radius of curvature as possible. (SeeFigure 18.33.) Smooth
surfaces are used on high-voltage transmission lines, for example, to avoid leakage of charge into the air.
Another device that makes use of some of these principles is aFaraday cage. This is a metal shield that encloses a
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 815
18.8 • Applications of Electrostatics 797
volume. All electrical charges will reside on the outside surface of this shield, and there will be no electrical field
inside. A Faraday cage is used to prohibit stray electrical fields in the environment from interfering with sensitive
measurements, such as the electrical signals inside a nerve cell.
During electrical storms if you are driving a car, it is best to stay inside the car as its metal body acts as a Faraday
cage with zero electrical field inside. If in the vicinity of a lightning strike, its effect is felt on the outside of the car
and the inside is unaffected, provided you remain totally inside. This is also true if an active (“hot”) electrical wire
was broken (in a storm or an accident) and fell on your car.
FIGURE18.32A very pointed conductor has a large charge concentration at the point. The electric field is very strong at the point and can
exert a force large enough to transfer charge on or off the conductor. Lightning rods are used to prevent the buildup of large excess charges
on structures and, thus, are pointed.
FIGURE18.33(a) A lightning rod is pointed to facilitate the transfer of charge. (credit: Romaine, Wikimedia Commons) (b) This Van de
Graaff generator has a smooth surface with a large radius of curvature to prevent the transfer of charge and allow a large voltage to be
generated. The mutual repulsion of like charges is evident in the person’s hair while touching the metal sphere. (credit: Jon ‘ShakataGaNai’
Davis/Wikimedia Commons).
18.8 Applications of Electrostatics
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
The study ofelectrostaticshas proven useful in many areas. This module covers just a few of the many applications
of electrostatics.
• Name several real-world applications of the study of electrostatics.
PAGE: 816
798 18 • Electric Charge and Electric Field
The Van de Graaff Generator
Van de Graaff generators(or Van de Graaffs) are not only spectacular devices used to demonstrate high voltage
due to static electricity—they are also used for serious research. The first was built by Robert Van de Graaff in 1931
(based on original suggestions by Lord Kelvin) for use in nuclear physics research.Figure 18.34shows a schematic
of a large research version. Van de Graaffs utilize both smooth and pointed surfaces, and conductors and insulators
to generate large static charges and, hence, large voltages.
A very large excess charge can be deposited on the sphere, because it moves quickly to the outer surface. Practical
limits arise because the large electric fields polarize and eventually ionize surrounding materials, creating free
charges that neutralize excess charge or allow it to escape. Nevertheless, voltages of 15 million volts are well within
practical limits.
FIGURE18.34Schematic of Van de Graaff generator. A battery (A) supplies excess positive charge to a pointed conductor, the points of
which spray the charge onto a moving insulating belt near the bottom. The pointed conductor (B) on top in the large sphere picks up the
charge. (The induced electric field at the points is so large that it removes the charge from the belt.) This can be done because the charge
does not remain inside the conducting sphere but moves to its outside surface. An ion source inside the sphere produces positive ions,
which are accelerated away from the positive sphere to high velocities.
Take-Home Experiment: Electrostatics and Humidity
Rub a comb through your hair and use it to lift pieces of paper. It may help to tear the pieces of paper rather than
cut them neatly. Repeat the exercise in your bathroom after you have had a long shower and the air in the
bathroom is moist. Is it easier to get electrostatic effects in dry or moist air? Why would torn paper be more
attractive to the comb than cut paper? Explain your observations.
Xerography
Most copy machines use an electrostatic process calledxerography—a word coined from the Greek wordsxerosfor
dry andgraphosfor writing. The heart of the process is shown in simplified form inFigure 18.35.
A selenium-coated aluminum drum is sprayed with positive charge from points on a device called a corotron.
Selenium is a substance with an interesting property—it is aphotoconductor. That is, selenium is an insulator when
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 817
18.8 • Applications of Electrostatics 799
in the dark and a conductor when exposed to light.
In the first stage of the xerography process, the conducting aluminum drum isgroundedso that a negative charge is
induced under the thin layer of uniformly positively charged selenium. In the second stage, the surface of the drum
is exposed to the image of whatever is to be copied. Where the image is light, the selenium becomes conducting,
and the positive charge is neutralized. In dark areas, the positive charge remains, and so the image has been
transferred to the drum.
The third stage takes a dry black powder, called toner, and sprays it with a negative charge so that it will be attracted
to the positive regions of the drum. Next, a blank piece of paper is given a greater positive charge than on the drum
so that it will pull the toner from the drum. Finally, the paper and electrostatically held toner are passed through
heated pressure rollers, which melt and permanently adhere the toner within the fibers of the paper.
FIGURE18.35Xerography is a dry copying process based on electrostatics. The major steps in the process are the charging of the
photoconducting drum, transfer of an image creating a positive charge duplicate, attraction of toner to the charged parts of the drum, and
transfer of toner to the paper. Not shown are heat treatment of the paper and cleansing of the drum for the next copy.
Laser Printers
Laser printersuse the xerographic process to make high-quality images on paper, employing a laser to produce an
image on the photoconducting drum as shown inFigure 18.36. In its most common application, the laser printer
receives output from a computer, and it can achieve high-quality output because of the precision with which laser
light can be controlled. Many laser printers do significant information processing, such as making sophisticated
letters or fonts, and may contain a computer more powerful than the one giving them the raw data to be printed.
FIGURE18.36In a laser printer, a laser beam is scanned across a photoconducting drum, leaving a positive charge image. The other steps
for charging the drum and transferring the image to paper are the same as in xerography. Laser light can be very precisely controlled,
enabling laser printers to produce high-quality images.
PAGE: 818
800 18 • Electric Charge and Electric Field
Ink Jet Printers and Electrostatic Painting
Theink jet printer, commonly used to print computer-generated text and graphics, also employs electrostatics. A
nozzle makes a fine spray of tiny ink droplets, which are then given an electrostatic charge. (SeeFigure 18.37.)
Once charged, the droplets can be directed, using pairs of charged plates, with great precision to form letters and
images on paper. Ink jet printers can produce color images by using a black jet and three other jets with primary
colors, usually cyan, magenta, and yellow, much as a color television produces color. (This is more difficult with
xerography, requiring multiple drums and toners.)
FIGURE18.37The nozzle of an ink-jet printer produces small ink droplets, which are sprayed with electrostatic charge. Various computer-
driven devices are then used to direct the droplets to the correct positions on a page.
Electrostatic painting employs electrostatic charge to spray paint onto odd-shaped surfaces. Mutual repulsion of like
charges causes the paint to fly away from its source. Surface tension forms drops, which are then attracted by unlike
charges to the surface to be painted. Electrostatic painting can reach those hard-to-get at places, applying an even
coat in a controlled manner. If the object is a conductor, the electric field is perpendicular to the surface, tending to
bring the drops in perpendicularly. Corners and points on conductors will receive extra paint. Felt can similarly be
applied.
Smoke Precipitators and Electrostatic Air Cleaning
Another important application of electrostatics is found in air cleaners, both large and small. The electrostatic part
of the process places excess (usually positive) charge on smoke, dust, pollen, and other particles in the air and then
passes the air through an oppositely charged grid that attracts and retains the charged particles. (SeeFigure 18.38.)
Largeelectrostatic precipitatorsare used industrially to remove over 99% of the particles from stack gas emissions
associated with the burning of coal and oil. Home precipitators, often in conjunction with the home heating and air
conditioning system, are very effective in removing polluting particles, irritants, and allergens.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 819
18.8 • Applications of Electrostatics 801
FIGURE18.38(a) Schematic of an electrostatic precipitator. Air is passed through grids of opposite charge. The first grid charges airborne
particles, while the second attracts and collects them. (b) The dramatic effect of electrostatic precipitators is seen by the absence of smoke
from this power plant. (credit: Cmdalgleish, Wikimedia Commons)
Problem-Solving Strategies for Electrostatics
1. Examine the situation to determine if static electricity is involved. This may concern separated stationary
charges, the forces among them, and the electric fields they create.
2. Identify the system of interest. This includes noting the number, locations, and types of charges involved.
3. Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem (identify the unknowns). A written list is
useful. Determine whether the Coulomb force is to be considered directly—if so, it may be useful to draw a
free-body diagram, using electric field lines.
4. Make a list of what is given or can be inferred from the problem as stated (identify the knowns). It is
important to distinguish the Coulomb force from the electric field , for example.
5. Solve the appropriate equation for the quantity to be determined (the unknown) or draw the field lines as
requested.
6. Examine the answer to see if it is reasonable: Does it make sense? Are units correct and the numbers
involved reasonable?
Integrated Concepts
The Integrated Concepts exercises for this module involve concepts such as electric charges, electric fields, and
several other topics. Physics is most interesting when applied to general situations involving more than a narrow set
of physical principles. The electric field exerts force on charges, for example, and hence the relevance ofDynamics:
Force and Newton’s Laws of Motion. The following topics are involved in some or all of the problems labeled
“Integrated Concepts”:
• Kinematics
• Two-Dimensional Kinematics
• Dynamics: Force and Newton’s Laws of Motion
• Uniform Circular Motion and Gravitation
• Statics and Torque
• Fluid Statics
The following worked example illustrates how this strategy is applied to an Integrated Concept problem:
PAGE: 820
802 18 • Electric Charge and Electric Field
EXAMPLE 18.5
Acceleration of a Charged Drop of Gasoline
If steps are not taken to ground a gasoline pump, static electricity can be placed on gasoline when filling your car’s
tank. Suppose a tiny drop of gasoline has a mass of and is given a positive charge of
. (a) Find the weight of the drop. (b) Calculate the electric force on the drop if there is an upward
electric field of strength due to other static electricity in the vicinity. (c) Calculate the drop’s
acceleration.
Strategy
To solve an integrated concept problem, we must first identify the physical principles involved and identify the
chapters in which they are found. Part (a) of this example asks for weight. This is a topic of dynamics and is defined
inDynamics: Force and Newton’s Laws of Motion. Part (b) deals with electric force on a charge, a topic ofElectric
Charge and Electric Field. Part (c) asks for acceleration, knowing forces and mass. These are part of Newton’s laws,
also found inDynamics: Force and Newton’s Laws of Motion.
The following solutions to each part of the example illustrate how the specific problem-solving strategies are
applied. These involve identifying knowns and unknowns, checking to see if the answer is reasonable, and so on.
Solution for (a)
Weight is mass times the acceleration due to gravity, as first expressed in
18.20
Entering the given mass and the average acceleration due to gravity yields
18.21
Discussion for (a)
This is a small weight, consistent with the small mass of the drop.
Solution for (b)
The force an electric field exerts on a charge is given by rearranging the following equation:
18.22
Here we are given the charge ( is twice the fundamental unit of charge) and the electric field
strength, and so the electric force is found to be
18.23
Discussion for (b)
While this is a small force, it is greater than the weight of the drop.
Solution for (c)
The acceleration can be found using Newton’s second law, provided we can identify all of the external forces acting
on the drop. We assume only the drop’s weight and the electric force are significant. Since the drop has a positive
charge and the electric field is given to be upward, the electric force is upward. We thus have a one-dimensional
(vertical direction) problem, and we can state Newton’s second law as
18.24
where . Entering this and the known values into the expression for Newton’s second law yields
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 821
18.8 • Applications of Electrostatics 803
18.25
Discussion for (c)
This is an upward acceleration great enough to carry the drop to places where you might not wish to have gasoline.
This worked example illustrates how to apply problem-solving strategies to situations that include topics in different
chapters. The first step is to identify the physical principles involved in the problem. The second step is to solve for
the unknown using familiar problem-solving strategies. These are found throughout the text, and many worked
examples show how to use them for single topics. In this integrated concepts example, you can see how to apply
them across several topics. You will find these techniques useful in applications of physics outside a physics course,
such as in your profession, in other science disciplines, and in everyday life. The following problems will build your
skills in the broad application of physical principles.
Unreasonable Results
The Unreasonable Results exercises for this module have results that are unreasonable because some premise
is unreasonable or because certain of the premises are inconsistent with one another. Physical principles
applied correctly then produce unreasonable results. The purpose of these problems is to give practice in
assessing whether nature is being accurately described, and if it is not to trace the source of difficulty.
Problem-Solving Strategy
To determine if an answer is reasonable, and to determine the cause if it is not, do the following.
1. Solve the problem using strategies as outlined above. Use the format followed in the worked examples in
the text to solve the problem as usual.
2. Check to see if the answer is reasonable. Is it too large or too small, or does it have the wrong sign,
improper units, and so on?
3. If the answer is unreasonable, look for what specifically could cause the identified difficulty. Usually, the
manner in which the answer is unreasonable is an indication of the difficulty. For example, an extremely
large Coulomb force could be due to the assumption of an excessively large separated charge.
PAGE: 822
804 18 • Glossary
Glossary
conductor a material that allows electrons to move grounded connected to the ground with a conductor,
separately from their atomic orbits so that charge flows freely to and from the Earth to
conductor an object with properties that allow the grounded object
charges to move about freely within it grounded when a conductor is connected to the
Coulomb force another term for the electrostatic Earth, allowing charge to freely flow to and from
force Earth’s unlimited reservoir
Coulomb interaction the interaction between two induction the process by which an electrically
charged particles generated by the Coulomb forces charged object brought near a neutral object creates
they exert on one another a charge in that object
Coulomb’s law the mathematical equation ink-jet printer small ink droplets sprayed with an
calculating the electrostatic force vector between electric charge are controlled by electrostatic plates
two charged particles to create images on paper
dipole a molecule’s lack of symmetrical charge insulator a material that holds electrons securely
distribution, causing one side to be more positive within their atomic orbits
and another to be more negative ionosphere a layer of charged particles located
electric charge a physical property of an object that around 100 km above the surface of Earth, which is
causes it to be attracted toward or repelled from responsible for a range of phenomena including the
another charged object; each charged object electric field surrounding Earth
generates and is influenced by a force called an laser printer uses a laser to create a photoconductive
electromagnetic force image on a drum, which attracts dry ink particles
electric field a three-dimensional map of the electric that are then rolled onto a sheet of paper to print a
force extended out into space from a point charge high-quality copy of the image
electric field lines a series of lines drawn from a law of conservation of charge states that whenever
point charge representing the magnitude and a charge is created, an equal amount of charge with
direction of force exerted by that charge the opposite sign is created simultaneously
electromagnetic force one of the four fundamental photoconductor a substance that is an insulator until
forces of nature; the electromagnetic force consists it is exposed to light, when it becomes a conductor
of static electricity, moving electricity and point charge A charged particle, designated ,
magnetism generating an electric field
electron a particle orbiting the nucleus of an atom polar molecule a molecule with an asymmetrical
and carrying the smallest unit of negative charge distribution of positive and negative charge
electrostatic equilibrium an electrostatically polarization slight shifting of positive and negative
balanced state in which all free electrical charges charges to opposite sides of an atom or molecule
have stopped moving about polarized a state in which the positive and negative
electrostatic force the amount and direction of charges within an object have collected in separate
attraction or repulsion between two charged bodies locations
electrostatic precipitators filters that apply charges proton a particle in the nucleus of an atom and
to particles in the air, then attract those charges to a carrying a positive charge equal in magnitude and
filter, removing them from the airstream opposite in sign to the amount of negative charge
electrostatic repulsion the phenomenon of two carried by an electron
objects with like charges repelling each other screening the dilution or blocking of an electrostatic
electrostatics the study of electric forces that are force on a charged object by the presence of other
static or slow-moving charges nearby
Faraday cage a metal shield which prevents electric static electricity a buildup of electric charge on the
charge from penetrating its surface surface of an object
field a map of the amount and direction of a force test charge A particle (designated ) with either a
acting on other objects, extending out into space positive or negative charge set down within an
free charge an electrical charge (either positive or electric field generated by a point charge
negative) which can move about separately from its Van de Graaff generator a machine that produces a
base molecule large amount of excess charge, used for
free electron an electron that is free to move away experiments with high voltage
from its atomic orbit vector a quantity with both magnitude and direction
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 823
18 • Section Summary 805
vector addition mathematical combination of two or xerography a dry copying process based on
more vectors, including their magnitudes, electrostatics
directions, and positions
Section Summary
18.1Static Electricity and Charge: the earth’s large reservoir.
Conservation of Charge • Objects can be charged by contact with another
charged object and obtain the same sign charge.
• There are only two types of charge, which we call
• If an object is temporarily grounded, it can be
positive and negative.
charged by induction, and obtains the opposite
• Like charges repel, unlike charges attract, and the
sign charge.
force between charges decreases with the square
• Polarized objects have their positive and negative
of the distance.
charges concentrated in different areas, giving
• The vast majority of positive charge in nature is
them a non-symmetrical charge.
carried by protons, while the vast majority of
• Polar molecules have an inherent separation of
negative charge is carried by electrons.
charge.
• The electric charge of one electron is equal in
magnitude and opposite in sign to the charge of 18.3Coulomb’s Law
one proton.
• Frenchman Charles Coulomb was the first to
• An ion is an atom or molecule that has nonzero
publish the mathematical equation that describes
total charge due to having unequal numbers of
the electrostatic force between two objects.
electrons and protons.
• Coulomb’s law gives the magnitude of the force
• The SI unit for charge is the coulomb (C), with
between point charges. It is
protons and electrons having charges of opposite
sign but equal magnitude; the magnitude of this
basic charge is
where and are two point charges separated
by a distance , and
• Whenever charge is created or destroyed, equal
amounts of positive and negative are involved. • This Coulomb force is extremely basic, since most
• Most often, existing charges are separated from charges are due to point-like particles. It is
neutral objects to obtain some net charge. responsible for all electrostatic effects and
• Both positive and negative charges exist in neutral underlies most macroscopic forces.
objects and can be separated by rubbing one • The Coulomb force is extraordinarily strong
object with another. For macroscopic objects, compared with the gravitational force, another
negatively charged means an excess of electrons basic force—but unlike gravitational force it can
and positively charged means a depletion of cancel, since it can be either attractive or
electrons. repulsive.
• The law of conservation of charge ensures that • The electrostatic force between two subatomic
whenever a charge is created, an equal charge of particles is far greater than the gravitational force
the opposite sign is created at the same time. between the same two particles.
18.2Conductors and Insulators 18.4Electric Field: Concept of a Field
Revisited
• Polarization is the separation of positive and
negative charges in a neutral object. • The electrostatic force field surrounding a charged
• A conductor is a substance that allows charge to object extends out into space in all directions.
flow freely through its atomic structure. • The electrostatic force exerted by a point charge
• An insulator holds charge within its atomic on a test charge at a distance depends on the
structure. charge of both charges, as well as the distance
• Objects with like charges repel each other, while between the two.
those with unlike charges attract each other. • The electric field is defined to be
• A conducting object is said to be grounded if it is
connected to the Earth through a conductor.
Grounding allows transfer of charge to and from where is the Coulomb or electrostatic force
exerted on a small positive test charge . has
PAGE: 824
806 18 • Conceptual Questions
units of N/C. • Biological systems contain water, and because
water molecules are polar, they have a strong
• The magnitude of the electric field created by a
effect on other molecules in living systems.
point charge is
18.7Conductors and Electric Fields in Static
Equilibrium
where is the distance from . The electric field
is a vector and fields due to multiple charges add • A conductor allows free charges to move about
like vectors. within it.
• The electrical forces around a conductor will cause
18.5Electric Field Lines: Multiple Charges
free charges to move around inside the conductor
until static equilibrium is reached.
• Drawings of electric field lines are useful visual
• Any excess charge will collect along the surface of
tools. The properties of electric field lines for any
a conductor.
charge distribution are that:
• Conductors with sharp corners or points will
• Field lines must begin on positive charges and
collect more charge at those points.
terminate on negative charges, or at infinity in the
• A lightning rod is a conductor with sharply pointed
hypothetical case of isolated charges.
ends that collect excess charge on the building
• The number of field lines leaving a positive charge
caused by an electrical storm and allow it to
or entering a negative charge is proportional to the
dissipate back into the air.
magnitude of the charge.
• Electrical storms result when the electrical field of
• The strength of the field is proportional to the
Earth’s surface in certain locations becomes more
closeness of the field lines—more precisely, it is
strongly charged, due to changes in the insulating
proportional to the number of lines per unit area
effect of the air.
perpendicular to the lines.
• A Faraday cage acts like a shield around an object,
• The direction of the electric field is tangent to the
preventing electric charge from penetrating inside.
field line at any point in space.
• Field lines can never cross. 18.8Applications of Electrostatics
18.6Electric Forces in Biology
• Electrostatics is the study of electric fields in static
equilibrium.
• Many molecules in living organisms, such as DNA,
• In addition to research using equipment such as a
carry a charge.
Van de Graaff generator, many practical
• An uneven distribution of the positive and negative
applications of electrostatics exist, including
charges within a polar molecule produces a dipole.
photocopiers, laser printers, ink-jet printers and
• The effect of a Coulomb field generated by a
electrostatic air filters.
charged object may be reduced or blocked by
other nearby charged objects.
Conceptual Questions
18.1Static Electricity and Charge: 18.2Conductors and Insulators
Conservation of Charge
3. An eccentric inventor attempts to levitate by first
1. There are very large numbers of charged particles in placing a large negative charge on himself and then
most objects. Why, then, don’t most objects exhibit putting a large positive charge on the ceiling of his
static electricity? workshop. Instead, while attempting to place a
2. Why do most objects tend to contain nearly equal large negative charge on himself, his clothes fly off.
numbers of positive and negative charges? Explain.
4. If you have charged an electroscope by contact with
a positively charged object, describe how you could
use it to determine the charge of other objects.
Specifically, what would the leaves of the
electroscope do if other charged objects were
brought near its knob?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 825
18 • Conceptual Questions 807
5. When a glass rod is rubbed with silk, it becomes 13. Are the direction and magnitude of the Coulomb
positive and the silk becomes negative—yet both force unique at a given point in space? What about
attract dust. Does the dust have a third type of the electric field?
charge that is attracted to both positive and
negative? Explain. 18.5Electric Field Lines: Multiple Charges
6. Why does a car always attract dust right after it is
14. Compare and contrast the Coulomb force field and
polished? (Note that car wax and car tires are
the electric field. To do this, make a list of five
insulators.)
properties for the Coulomb force field analogous
7. Describe how a positively charged object can be
to the five properties listed for electric field lines.
used to give another object a negative charge. What
Compare each item in your list of Coulomb force
is the name of this process?
field properties with those of the electric field—are
8. What is grounding? What effect does it have on a
they the same or different? (For example, electric
charged conductor? On a charged insulator?
field lines cannot cross. Is the same true for
Coulomb field lines?)
18.3Coulomb’s Law
15. Figure 18.40shows an electric field extending
9. Figure 18.39shows the charge distribution in a over three regions, labeled I, II, and III. Answer
water molecule, which is called a polar molecule the following questions. (a) Are there any isolated
because it has an inherent separation of charge. charges? If so, in what region and what are their
Given water’s polar character, explain what effect signs? (b) Where is the field strongest? (c) Where
humidity has on removing excess charge from is it weakest? (d) Where is the field the most
objects. uniform?
FIGURE18.39Schematic representation of the outer electron FIGURE18.40
cloud of a neutral water molecule. The electrons spend more
time near the oxygen than the hydrogens, giving a permanent
charge separation as shown. Water is thus apolar molecule. It 18.6Electric Forces in Biology
is more easily affected by electrostatic forces than molecules
with uniform charge distributions.
16. A cell membrane is a thin layer enveloping a cell.
10. UsingFigure 18.39, explain, in terms of Coulomb’s The thickness of the membrane is much less than
law, why a polar molecule (such as inFigure the size of the cell. In a static situation the
18.39) is attracted by both positive and negative membrane has a charge distribution of
charges. C/m2on its inner surface and
11. Given the polar character of water molecules, C/m2on its outer surface. Draw a
explain how ions in the air form nucleation centers diagram of the cell and the surrounding cell
for rain droplets. membrane. Include on this diagram the charge
distribution and the corresponding electric field. Is
18.4Electric Field: Concept of a Field there any electric field inside the cell? Is there any
Revisited electric field outside the cell?
12. Why must the test charge in the definition of the
electric field be vanishingly small?
PAGE: 826
808 18 • Conceptual Questions
18.7Conductors and Electric Fields in Static
Equilibrium
17. Is the object inFigure 18.41a conductor or an
insulator? Justify your answer.
FIGURE18.42Four point charges , , , and lie on the
corners of a square and is located at its center.
26. (a) Using the symmetry of the arrangement, show
that the electric field at the center of the square in
Figure 18.42is zero if the charges on the four
FIGURE18.41
corners are exactly equal. (b) Show that this is
18. If the electric field lines in the figure above were also true for any combination of charges in which
perpendicular to the object, would it necessarily and
be a conductor? Explain. 27. (a) What is the direction of the total Coulomb force
19. The discussion of the electric field between two on inFigure 18.42if is negative, and
parallel conducting plates, in this module states both are negative, and and both are
that edge effects are less important if the plates positive? (b) What is the direction of the electric
are close together. What does close mean? That is, field at the center of the square in this situation?
is the actual plate separation crucial, or is the ratio 28. ConsideringFigure 18.42, suppose that
of plate separation to plate area crucial? and . First show that is in static
20. Would the self-created electric field at the end of equilibrium. (You may neglect the gravitational
a pointed conductor, such as a lightning rod, force.) Then discuss whether the equilibrium is
remove positive or negative charge from the stable or unstable, noting that this may depend on
conductor? Would the same sign charge be the signs of the charges and the direction of
removed from a neutral pointed conductor by the displacement of from the center of the square.
application of a similar externally created electric 29. If inFigure 18.42, under what conditions
field? (The answers to both questions have will there be no net Coulomb force on ?
implications for charge transfer utilizing points.) 30. In regions of low humidity, one develops a special
21. Why is a golfer with a metal club over her shoulder “grip” when opening car doors, or touching metal
vulnerable to lightning in an open fairway? Would door knobs. This involves placing as much of the
she be any safer under a tree? hand on the device as possible, not just the ends
22. Can the belt of a Van de Graaff accelerator be a of one’s fingers. Discuss the induced charge and
conductor? Explain. explain why this is done.
23. Are you relatively safe from lightning inside an 31. Tollbooth stations on roadways and bridges
automobile? Give two reasons. usually have a piece of wire stuck in the pavement
24. Discuss pros and cons of a lightning rod being before them that will touch a car as it approaches.
grounded versus simply being attached to a Why is this done?
building. 32. Suppose a person carries an excess charge. To
25. Using the symmetry of the arrangement, show maintain their charged status can they be standing
that the net Coulomb force on the charge at the on ground wearing just any pair of shoes? How
center of the square below (Figure 18.42) is zero if would you discharge them? What are the
the charges on the four corners are exactly equal. consequences if they simply walk away?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 827
18 • Problems & Exercises 809
Problems & Exercises
18.1Static Electricity and Charge: 12. Two point charges exert a 5.00 N force on each
Conservation of Charge other. What will the force become if the distance
between them is increased by a factor of three?
1. Common static electricity involves charges ranging
13. Two point charges are brought closer together,
from nanocoulombs to microcoulombs. (a) How
increasing the force between them by a factor of
many electrons are needed to form a charge of
25. By what factor was their separation
(b) How many electrons must be removed
decreased?
from a neutral object to leave a net charge of
14. How far apart must two point charges of 75.0 nC
?
(typical of static electricity) be to have a force of
2. If electrons move through a pocket
1.00 N between them?
calculator during a full day’s operation, how many
15. If two equal charges each of 1 C each are
coulombs of charge moved through it?
separated in air by a distance of 1 km, what is the
3. To start a car engine, the car battery moves
magnitude of the force acting between them? You
electrons through the starter motor.
will see that even at a distance as large as 1 km,
How many coulombs of charge were moved?
the repulsive force is substantial because 1 C is a
4. A certain lightning bolt moves 40.0 C of charge.
very significant amount of charge.
How many fundamental units of charge is this?
16. A test charge of is placed halfway between
a charge of and another of
18.2Conductors and Insulators
separated by 10 cm. (a) What is the magnitude of
the force on the test charge? (b) What is the
5. Suppose a speck of dust in an electrostatic
direction of this force (away from or toward the
precipitator has protons in it and
charge)?
has a net charge of –5.00 nC (a very large charge for
17. Bare free charges do not remain stationary when
a small speck). How many electrons does it have?
close together. To illustrate this, calculate the
6. An amoeba has protons and a net
acceleration of two isolated protons separated by
charge of 0.300 pC. (a) How many fewer electrons
2.00 nm (a typical distance between gas atoms).
are there than protons? (b) If you paired them up,
Explicitly show how you follow the steps in the
what fraction of the protons would have no
Problem-Solving Strategy for electrostatics.
electrons?
18. (a) By what factor must you change the distance
7. A 50.0 g ball of copper has a net charge of .
between two point charges to change the force
What fraction of the copper’s electrons has been
between them by a factor of 10? (b) Explain how
removed? (Each copper atom has 29 protons, and
the distance can either increase or decrease by
copper has an atomic mass of 63.5.)
this factor and still cause a factor of 10 change in
8. What net charge would you place on a 100 g piece
the force.
of sulfur if you put an extra electron on 1 in of
19. Suppose you have a total charge that you can
its atoms? (Sulfur has an atomic mass of 32.1.)
split in any manner. Once split, the separation
9. How many coulombs of positive charge are there in
distance is fixed. How do you split the charge to
4.00 kg of plutonium, given its atomic mass is 244
achieve the greatest force?
and that each plutonium atom has 94 protons?
20. (a) Common transparent tape becomes charged
when pulled from a dispenser. If one piece is
18.3Coulomb’s Law
placed above another, the repulsive force can be
10. What is the repulsive force between two pith balls great enough to support the top piece’s weight.
that are 8.00 cm apart and have equal charges of Assuming equal point charges (only an
– 30.0 nC? approximation), calculate the magnitude of the
11. (a) How strong is the attractive force between a charge if electrostatic force is great enough to
glass rod with a charge and a silk cloth support the weight of a 10.0 mg piece of tape held
with a charge, which are 12.0 cm 1.00 cm above another. (b) Discuss whether the
apart, using the approximation that they act like magnitude of this charge is consistent with what is
point charges? (b) Discuss how the answer to this typical of static electricity.
problem might be affected if the charges are
distributed over some area and do not act like
point charges.
PAGE: 828
810 18 • Problems & Exercises
21. (a) Find the ratio of the electrostatic to 32. (a) Find the magnitude and direction of an electric
gravitational force between two electrons. (b) field that exerts a westward force
What is this ratio for two protons? (c) Why is the on an electron. (b) What magnitude and direction
ratio different for electrons and protons? force does this field exert on a proton?
22. At what distance is the electrostatic force
between two protons equal to the weight of one 18.5Electric Field Lines: Multiple Charges
proton?
33. (a) Sketch the electric field lines near a point
23. A certain five cent coin contains 5.00 g of nickel.
charge . (b) Do the same for a point charge
What fraction of the nickel atoms’ electrons,
.
removed and placed 1.00 m above it, would
34. Sketch the electric field lines a long distance from
support the weight of this coin? The atomic mass
the charge distributions shown inFigure 18.23(a)
of nickel is 58.7, and each nickel atom contains 28
and (b)
electrons and 28 protons.
35. Figure 18.43shows the electric field lines near
24. (a) Two point charges totaling exert a
two charges and . What is the ratio of their
repulsive force of 0.150 N on one another when
magnitudes? (b) Sketch the electric field lines a
separated by 0.500 m. What is the charge on
long distance from the charges shown in the
each? (b) What is the charge on each if the force is
figure.
attractive?
25. Point charges of and are placed
0.250 m apart. (a) Where can a third charge be
placed so that the net force on it is zero? (b) What
if both charges are positive?
26. Two point charges and are apart,
and their total charge is . (a) If the force of
repulsion between them is 0.075N, what are
magnitudes of the two charges? (b) If one charge
attracts the other with a force of 0.525N, what are
the magnitudes of the two charges? Note that you
may need to solve a quadratic equation to reach
your answer.
18.4Electric Field: Concept of a Field
Revisited
FIGURE18.43The electric field near two charges.
27. What is the magnitude and direction of an electric
field that exerts a upward force on 36. Sketch the electric field lines in the vicinity of two
a charge? opposite charges, where the negative charge is
28. What is the magnitude and direction of the force three times greater in magnitude than the positive.
exerted on a charge by a 250 N/C electric (SeeFigure 18.43for a similar situation).
field that points due east?
29. Calculate the magnitude of the electric field 2.00
m from a point charge of 5.00 mC (such as found
on the terminal of a Van de Graaff).
30. (a) What magnitude point charge creates a 10,000
N/C electric field at a distance of 0.250 m? (b)
How large is the field at 10.0 m?
31. Calculate the initial (from rest) acceleration of a
proton in a electric field (such as
created by a research Van de Graaff). Explicitly
show how you follow the steps in the Problem-
Solving Strategy for electrostatics.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 829
18 • Problems & Exercises 811
18.7Conductors and Electric Fields in Static 40. Sketch the electric field lines in the vicinity of the
Equilibrium charged insulator inFigure 18.47noting its
nonuniform charge distribution.
37. Sketch the electric field lines in the vicinity of the
conductor inFigure 18.44given the field was
originally uniform and parallel to the object’s long
axis. Is the resulting field small near the long side
of the object?
FIGURE18.44
38. Sketch the electric field lines in the vicinity of the
conductor inFigure 18.45given the field was
FIGURE18.47A charged insulating rod such as might be
originally uniform and parallel to the object’s long
used in a classroom demonstration.
axis. Is the resulting field small near the long side
41. What is the force on the charge located at
of the object?
inFigure 18.48(a) given that
?
FIGURE18.45
39. Sketch the electric field between the two
conducting plates shown inFigure 18.46, given FIGURE18.48(a) Point charges located at 3.00, 8.00, and
11.0 cm along thex-axis. (b) Point charges located at 1.00,
the top plate is positive and an equal amount of
5.00, 8.00, and 14.0 cm along thex-axis.
negative charge is on the bottom plate. Be certain
42. (a) Find the total electric field at in
to indicate the distribution of charge on the plates.
Figure 18.48(b). (b) If the charges are allowed to
move and eventually be brought to rest by friction,
what will the final charge configuration be? (That
is, will there be a single charge, double charge,
etc., and what will its value(s) be?)
43. (a) Find the electric field at inFigure
18.48(a), given that . (b) At what
position between 3.00 and 8.00 cm is the total
electric field the same as that for alone? (c)
Can the electric field be zero anywhere between
FIGURE18.46 0.00 and 8.00 cm? (d) At very large positive or
negative values ofx,the electric field approaches
zero in both (a) and (b). In which does it most
rapidly approach zero and why? (e) At what
position to the right of 11.0 cm is the total electric
field zero, other than at infinity? (Hint: A graphing
calculator can yield considerable insight in this
problem.)
PAGE: 830
812 18 • Problems & Exercises
44. (a) Find the total Coulomb force on a charge of 49. (a) Find the electric field at the location of in
2.00 nC located at inFigure 18.48 Figure 18.50, given that and
(b), given that . (b) Find thex-position . (b) What is the force on , given
at which the electric field is zero inFigure 18.48 that ?
(b).
45. Using the symmetry of the arrangement,
determine the direction of the force on in the
figure below, given that and
. (b) Calculate the magnitude
of the force on the charge , given that the square
is 10.0 cm on a side and .
FIGURE18.50Point charges located at the corners of an
equilateral triangle 25.0 cm on a side.
50. (a) Find the electric field at the center of the
triangular configuration of charges inFigure 18.50,
given that , , and
. (b) Is there any combination of
charges, other than , that will
produce a zero strength electric field at the center
FIGURE18.49 of the triangular configuration?
46. (a) Using the symmetry of the arrangement,
determine the direction of the electric field at the 18.8Applications of Electrostatics
center of the square inFigure 18.49, given that
51. (a) What is the electric field 5.00 m from the
and . (b)
center of the terminal of a Van de Graaff with a
Calculate the magnitude of the electric field at the
3.00 mC charge, noting that the field is equivalent
location of , given that the square is 5.00 cm on a
to that of a point charge at the center of the
side.
terminal? (b) At this distance, what force does the
47. Find the electric field at the location of in
field exert on a charge on the Van de
Figure 18.49given that ,
Graaff’s belt?
, and the square is 20.0 cm on a
52. (a) What is the direction and magnitude of an
side.
electric field that supports the weight of a free
48. Find the total Coulomb force on the charge in
electron near the surface of Earth? (b) Discuss
Figure 18.49, given that ,
what the small value for this field implies
, , ,
regarding the relative strength of the gravitational
and . The square is 50.0 cm on a
and electrostatic forces.
side.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 831
18 • Problems & Exercises 813
53. A simple and common technique for accelerating 57. Integrated Concepts
electrons is shown inFigure 18.51, where there is Calculate the angular velocity of an electron
a uniform electric field between two plates. orbiting a proton in the hydrogen atom, given the
Electrons are released, usually from a hot radius of the orbit is . You may
filament, near the negative plate, and there is a assume that the proton is stationary and the
small hole in the positive plate that allows the centripetal force is supplied by Coulomb
electrons to continue moving. (a) Calculate the attraction.
acceleration of the electron if the field strength is 58. Integrated Concepts
. (b) Explain why the electron will An electron has an initial velocity of
not be pulled back to the positive plate once it in a uniform
moves through the hole. strength electric field. The field accelerates the
electron in the direction opposite to its initial
velocity. (a) What is the direction of the electric
field? (b) How far does the electron travel before
coming to rest? (c) How long does it take the
electron to come to rest? (d) What is the electron’s
velocity when it returns to its starting point?
59. Integrated Concepts
The practical limit to an electric field in air is about
. Above this strength, sparking
takes place because air begins to ionize and
charges flow, reducing the field. (a) Calculate the
distance a free proton must travel in this field to
reach of the speed of light, starting from
rest. (b) Is this practical in air, or must it occur in a
vacuum?
60. Integrated Concepts
A 5.00 g charged insulating ball hangs on a 30.0
cm long string in a uniform horizontal electric field
as shown inFigure 18.52. Given the charge on the
ball is , find the strength of the field.
FIGURE18.51Parallel conducting plates with opposite
charges on them create a relatively uniform electric field
used to accelerate electrons to the right. Those that go
through the hole can be used to make a TV or computer
screen glow or to produce X-rays.
54. Earth has a net charge that produces an electric
field of approximately 150 N/C downward at its
surface. (a) What is the magnitude and sign of the
excess charge, noting the electric field of a
conducting sphere is equivalent to a point charge
at its center? (b) What acceleration will the field
produce on a free electron near Earth’s surface?
(c) What mass object with a single extra electron
will have its weight supported by this field?
55. Point charges of and are placed
0.500 m apart. (a) At what point along the line
between them is the electric field zero? (b) What is
the electric field halfway between them? FIGURE18.52A horizontal electric field causes the charged
ball to hang at an angle of .
56. What can you say about two charges and , if
the electric field one-fourth of the way from to
is zero?
PAGE: 832
814 18 • Problems & Exercises
61. Integrated Concepts 63. Integrated Concepts
Figure 18.53shows an electron passing between two (a) InFigure 18.55, four equal charges lie on the
charged metal plates that create an 100 N/C vertical corners of a square. A fifth charge is on a mass
electric field perpendicular to the electron’s original directly above the center of the square, at a
horizontal velocity. (These can be used to change the height equal to the length of one side of the
electron’s direction, such as in an oscilloscope.) The square. Determine the magnitude of in terms of
initial speed of the electron is , and the , , and , if the Coulomb force is to equal the
horizontal distance it travels in the uniform field is 4.00 weight of . (b) Is this equilibrium stable or
cm. (a) What is its vertical deflection? (b) What is the unstable? Discuss.
vertical component of its final velocity? (c) At what
angle does it exit? Neglect any edge effects.
FIGURE18.53
FIGURE18.55Four equal charges on the corners of a
horizontal square support the weight of a fifth charge located
62. Integrated Concepts
directly above the center of the square.
The classic Millikan oil drop experiment was the
64. Unreasonable Results
first to obtain an accurate measurement of the
(a) Calculate the electric field strength near a 10.0
charge on an electron. In it, oil drops were
cm diameter conducting sphere that has 1.00 C of
suspended against the gravitational force by a
excess charge on it. (b) What is unreasonable
vertical electric field. (SeeFigure 18.54.) Given the
about this result? (c) Which assumptions are
oil drop to be in radius and have a density
responsible?
of : (a) Find the weight of the drop. (b) If
65. Unreasonable Results
the drop has a single excess electron, find the
(a) Two 0.500 g raindrops in a thunderhead are
electric field strength needed to balance its weight.
1.00 cm apart when they each acquire 1.00 mC
charges. Find their acceleration. (b) What is
unreasonable about this result? (c) Which premise
or assumption is responsible?
66. Unreasonable Results
A wrecking yard inventor wants to pick up cars by
charging a 0.400 m diameter ball and inducing an
equal and opposite charge on the car. If a car has
a 1000 kg mass and the ball is to be able to lift it
from a distance of 1.00 m: (a) What minimum
charge must be used? (b) What is the electric field
FIGURE18.54In the Millikan oil drop experiment, small near the surface of the ball? (c) Why are these
drops can be suspended in an electric field by the force results unreasonable? (d) Which premise or
exerted on a single excess electron. Classically, this
assumption is responsible?
experiment was used to determine the electron charge by
measuring the electric field and mass of the drop.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 833
18 • Problems & Exercises 815
67. Construct Your Own Problem 69. Critical ThinkingA frictionless circular track with a
Consider two insulating balls with evenly diameter of 4.00 m has two spheres of 10.0 kg
distributed equal and opposite charges on their each anchored very near it. The track is oriented
surfaces, held with a certain distance between the with a diameter along thex-axis. The anchored
centers of the balls. Construct a problem in which spheres are just outside the track. One of the
you calculate the electric field (magnitude and anchored spheres is just left of the origin at a
direction) due to the balls at various points along a distance of from it, and the other
line running through the centers of the balls and is on thex-axis just right of the track at a distance
extending to infinity on either side. Choose of past . Each sphere carries
interesting points and comment on the meaning of a charge of . (Note: The slight
the field at those points. For example, at what distance from the track is so the particles cannot
points might the field be just that due to one ball collide, and does not enter into the calculations
and where does the field become negligibly small? for three significant figures.) (a) A third sphere has
Among the things to be considered are the a mass of 10.00 kg and carries a charge of
magnitudes of the charges and the distance . It is free to move on the track. It
between the centers of the balls. Your instructor is initially placed an equal length from the two
may wish for you to consider the electric field off anchored spheres at . What is the total
axis or for a more complex array of charges, such force on the third sphere? (Be certain to include
as those in a water molecule. gravity between the spheres.) (b) Will the third
68. Construct Your Own Problem sphere move? (c) Label the first two spheres A and
Consider identical spherical conducting space B, and the movable sphere C. Now start sphere C
ships in deep space where gravitational fields at . What are the forces on sphere C?
from other bodies are negligible compared to the (d) Will sphere C now move? (e) If it does, where
gravitational attraction between the ships. will it stop moving and reverse course? If it does
Construct a problem in which you place identical not move, you may skip this part. (f) How many
excess charges on the space ships to exactly equilibrium points are there on the track at which
counter their gravitational attraction. Calculate the the movable sphere will remain stationary? Where
amount of excess charge needed. Examine are they?
whether that charge depends on the distance
between the centers of the ships, the masses of
the ships, or any other factors. Discuss whether
this would be an easy, difficult, or even impossible
thing to do in practice.
PAGE: 834
816 18 • Problems & Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 835
CHAPTER 19
Electric Potential and Electric Field
FIGURE19.1Automated external defibrillator unit (AED) (credit: U.S. Defense Department photo/Tech. Sgt. Suzanne M. Day)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
19.1Electric Potential Energy: Potential Difference
19.2Electric Potential in a Uniform Electric Field
19.3Electrical Potential Due to a Point Charge
19.4Equipotential Lines
19.5Capacitors and Dielectrics
19.6Capacitors in Series and Parallel
19.7Energy Stored in Capacitors
INTRODUCTION TO ELECTRIC POTENTIAL AND ELECTRIC ENERGY InElectric Charge and Electric Field, we just
scratched the surface (or at least rubbed it) of electrical phenomena. Two of the most familiar aspects of electricity
are its energy andvoltage. We know, for example, that great amounts of electrical energy can be stored in batteries,
are transmitted cross-country through power lines, and may jump from clouds to explode the sap of trees. In a
similar manner, at molecular levels,ionscross cell membranes and transfer information. We also know about
voltages associated with electricity. Batteries are typically a few volts, the outlets in your home produce 120 volts,
and power lines can be as high as hundreds of thousands of volts. But energy and voltage are not the same thing. A
motorcycle battery, for example, is small and would not be very successful in replacing the much larger car battery,
yet each has the same voltage. In this chapter, we shall examine the relationship between voltage and electrical
energy and begin to explore some of the many applications of electricity.
PAGE: 836
818 19 • Electric Potential and Electric Field
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/19-introduction-to-electric-potential-
and-electric-energy)
19.1 Electric Potential Energy: Potential Difference
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define electric potential and electric potential energy.
• Describe the relationship between potential difference and electrical potential energy.
• Explain electron volt and its usage in submicroscopic process.
• Determine electric potential energy given potential difference and amount of charge.
When a free positive charge is accelerated by an electric field, such as shown inFigure 19.2, it is given kinetic
energy. The process is analogous to an object being accelerated by a gravitational field. It is as if the charge is going
down an electrical hill where its electric potential energy is converted to kinetic energy. Let us explore the work done
on a charge by the electric field in this process, so that we may develop a definition of electric potential energy.
FIGURE19.2A charge accelerated by an electric field is analogous to a mass going down a hill. In both cases potential energy is converted
to another form. Work is done by a force, but since this force is conservative, we can write .
The electrostatic or Coulomb force is conservative, which means that the work done on is independent of the path
taken. This is exactly analogous to the gravitational force in the absence of dissipative forces such as friction. When
a force is conservative, it is possible to define a potential energy associated with the force, and it is usually easier to
deal with the potential energy (because it depends only on position) than to calculate the work directly.
We use the letters PE to denote electric potential energy, which has units of joules (J). The change in potential
energy, , is crucial, since the work done by a conservative force is the negative of the change in potential
energy; that is, . For example, work done to accelerate a positive charge from rest is positive and
results from a loss in PE, or a negative . There must be a minus sign in front of to make positive. PE can
be found at any point by taking one point as a reference and calculating the work needed to move a charge to the
other point.
Potential Energy
. For example, work done to accelerate a positive charge from rest is positive and results from a
loss in PE, or a negative There must be a minus sign in front of to make positive. PE can be found
at any point by taking one point as a reference and calculating the work needed to move a charge to the other
point.
Gravitational potential energy and electric potential energy are quite analogous. Potential energy accounts for work
done by a conservative force and gives added insight regarding energy and energy transformation without the
necessity of dealing with the force directly. It is much more common, for example, to use the concept of voltage
(related to electric potential energy) than to deal with the Coulomb force directly.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 837
19.1 • Electric Potential Energy: Potential Difference 819
Calculating the work directly is generally difficult, since and the direction and magnitude of can be
complex for multiple charges, for odd-shaped objects, and along arbitrary paths. But we do know that, since
, the work, and hence , is proportional to the test charge To have a physical quantity that is
independent of test charge, we defineelectric potential (or simply potential, since electric is understood) to be
the potential energy per unit charge:
19.1
Electric Potential
This is the electric potential energy per unit charge.
19.2
Since PE is proportional to , the dependence on cancels. Thus does not depend on . The change in potential
energy is crucial, and so we are concerned with the difference in potential or potential difference between
two points, where
19.3
Thepotential differencebetween points A and B, , is thus defined to be the change in potential energy of
a charge moved from A to B, divided by the charge. Units of potential difference are joules per coulomb, given the
name volt (V) after Alessandro Volta.
19.4
Potential Difference
The potential difference between points A and B, , is defined to be the change in potential energy of a
charge moved from A to B, divided by the charge. Units of potential difference are joules per coulomb, given
the name volt (V) after Alessandro Volta.
19.5
The familiar termvoltageis the common name for potential difference. Keep in mind that whenever a voltage is
quoted, it is understood to be the potential difference between two points. For example, every battery has two
terminals, and its voltage is the potential difference between them. More fundamentally, the point you choose to be
zero volts is arbitrary. This is analogous to the fact that gravitational potential energy has an arbitrary zero, such as
sea level or perhaps a lecture hall floor.
In summary, the relationship between potential difference (or voltage) and electrical potential energy is given by
19.6
Potential Difference and Electrical Potential Energy
The relationship between potential difference (or voltage) and electrical potential energy is given by
19.7
PAGE: 838
820 19 • Electric Potential and Electric Field
The second equation is equivalent to the first.
Voltage is not the same as energy. Voltage is the energy per unit charge. Thus a motorcycle battery and a car battery
can both have the same voltage (more precisely, the same potential difference between battery terminals), yet one
stores much more energy than the other since . The car battery can move more charge than the
motorcycle battery, although both are 12 V batteries.
EXAMPLE 19.1
Calculating Energy
Suppose you have a 12.0 V motorcycle battery that can move 5000 C of charge, and a 12.0 V car battery that can
move 60,000 C of charge. How much energy does each deliver? (Assume that the numerical value of each charge is
accurate to three significant figures.)
Strategy
To say we have a 12.0 V battery means that its terminals have a 12.0 V potential difference. When such a battery
moves charge, it puts the charge through a potential difference of 12.0 V, and the charge is given a change in
potential energy equal to .
So to find the energy output, we multiply the charge moved by the potential difference.
Solution
For the motorcycle battery, and . The total energy delivered by the motorcycle battery is
19.8
×
Similarly, for the car battery, and
19.9
×
Discussion
While voltage and energy are related, they are not the same thing. The voltages of the batteries are identical, but the
energy supplied by each is quite different. Note also that as a battery is discharged, some of its energy is used
internally and its terminal voltage drops, such as when headlights dim because of a low car battery. The energy
supplied by the battery is still calculated as in this example, but not all of the energy is available for external use.
Note that the energies calculated in the previous example are absolute values. The change in potential energy for
the battery is negative, since it loses energy. These batteries, like many electrical systems, actually move negative
charge—electrons in particular. The batteries repel electrons from their negative terminals (A) through whatever
circuitry is involved and attract them to their positive terminals (B) as shown inFigure 19.3. The change in potential
is and the charge is negative, so that is negative, meaning the potential
energy of the battery has decreased when has moved from A to B.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 839
19.1 • Electric Potential Energy: Potential Difference 821
FIGURE19.3A battery moves negative charge from its negative terminal through a headlight to its positive terminal. Appropriate
combinations of chemicals in the battery separate charges so that the negative terminal has an excess of negative charge, which is repelled
by it and attracted to the excess positive charge on the other terminal. In terms of potential, the positive terminal is at a higher voltage than
the negative. Inside the battery, both positive and negative charges move.
EXAMPLE 19.2
How Many Electrons Move through a Headlight Each Second?
When a 12.0 V car battery runs a single 30.0 W headlight, how many electrons pass through it each second?
Strategy
To find the number of electrons, we must first find the charge that moved in 1.00 s. The charge moved is related to
voltage and energy through the equation . A 30.0 W lamp uses 30.0 joules per second. Since the
battery loses energy, we have and, since the electrons are going from the negative terminal to the
positive, we see that .
Solution
To find the charge moved, we solve the equation :
19.10
Entering the values for and , we get
19.11
The number of electrons is the total charge divided by the charge per electron. That is,
×
19.12
×
Discussion
This is a very large number. It is no wonder that we do not ordinarily observe individual electrons with so many being
present in ordinary systems. In fact, electricity had been in use for many decades before it was determined that the
moving charges in many circumstances were negative. Positive charge moving in the opposite direction of negative
charge often produces identical effects; this makes it difficult to determine which is moving or whether both are
moving.
The Electron Volt
The energy per electron is very small in macroscopic situations like that in the previous example—a tiny fraction of a
joule. But on a submicroscopic scale, such energy per particle (electron, proton, or ion) can be of great importance.
PAGE: 840
822 19 • Electric Potential and Electric Field
For example, even a tiny fraction of a joule can be great enough for these particles to destroy organic molecules and
harm living tissue. The particle may do its damage by direct collision, or it may create harmful x rays, which can also
inflict damage. It is useful to have an energy unit related to submicroscopic effects.Figure 19.4shows a situation
related to the definition of such an energy unit. An electron is accelerated between two charged metal plates as it
might be in an old-model television tube or oscilloscope. The electron is given kinetic energy that is later converted
to another form—light in the television tube, for example. (Note that downhill for the electron is uphill for a positive
charge.) Since energy is related to voltage by we can think of the joule as a coulomb-volt.
FIGURE19.4A typical electron gun accelerates electrons using a potential difference between two metal plates. The energy of the electron
in electron volts is numerically the same as the voltage between the plates. For example, a 5000 V potential difference produces 5000 eV
electrons.
On the submicroscopic scale, it is more convenient to define an energy unit called theelectron volt(eV), which is
the energy given to a fundamental charge accelerated through a potential difference of 1 V. In equation form,
×
19.13
Electron Volt
On the submicroscopic scale, it is more convenient to define an energy unit called the electron volt (eV), which is
the energy given to a fundamental charge accelerated through a potential difference of 1 V.In equation form,
×
19.14
An electron accelerated through a potential difference of 1 V is given an energy of 1 eV. It follows that an electron
accelerated through 50 V is given 50 eV. A potential difference of 100,000 V (100 kV) will give an electron an energy
of 100,000 eV (100 keV), and so on. Similarly, an ion with a double positive charge accelerated through 100 V will be
given 200 eV of energy. These simple relationships between accelerating voltage and particle charges make the
electron volt a simple and convenient energy unit in such circumstances.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 841
19.1 • Electric Potential Energy: Potential Difference 823
Connections: Energy Units
The electron volt (eV) is the most common energy unit for submicroscopic processes. This will be particularly
noticeable in the chapters on modern physics. Energy is so important to so many subjects that there is a
tendency to define a special energy unit for each major topic. There are, for example, calories for food energy,
kilowatt-hours for electrical energy, and therms for natural gas energy.
The electron volt is commonly employed in submicroscopic processes—chemical valence energies and molecular
and nuclear binding energies are among the quantities often expressed in electron volts. For example, about 5 eV of
energy is required to break up certain organic molecules. If a proton is accelerated from rest through a potential
difference of 30 kV, it is given an energy of 30 keV (30,000 eV) and it can break up as many as 6000 of these
molecules ( ). Nuclear decay energies are on the order of 1 MeV
(1,000,000 eV) per event and can, thus, produce significant biological damage.
Conservation of Energy
The total energy of a system is conserved if there is no net addition (or subtraction) of work or heat transfer. For
conservative forces, such as the electrostatic force, conservation of energy states that mechanical energy is a
constant.
Mechanical energyis the sum of the kinetic energy and potential energy of a system; that is, .
A loss of PE of a charged particle becomes an increase in its KE. Here PE is the electric potential energy.
Conservation of energy is stated in equation form as
19.15
or
19.16
where i and f stand for initial and final conditions. As we have found many times before, considering energy can give
us insights and facilitate problem solving.
EXAMPLE 19.3
Electrical Potential Energy Converted to Kinetic Energy
Calculate the final speed of a free electron accelerated from rest through a potential difference of 100 V. (Assume
that this numerical value is accurate to three significant figures.)
Strategy
We have a system with only conservative forces. Assuming the electron is accelerated in a vacuum, and neglecting
the gravitational force (we will check on this assumption later), all of the electrical potential energy is converted into
kinetic energy. We can identify the initial and final forms of energy to be
Solution
Conservation of energy states that
19.17
Entering the forms identified above, we obtain
19.18
We solve this for :
PAGE: 842
824 19 • Electric Potential and Electric Field
19.19
Entering values for gives
×
19.20
Discussion
Note that both the charge and the initial voltage are negative, as inFigure 19.4. From the discussions inElectric
Charge and Electric Field, we know that electrostatic forces on small particles are generally very large compared
with the gravitational force. The large final speed confirms that the gravitational force is indeed negligible here. The
large speed also indicates how easy it is to accelerate electrons with small voltages because of their very small
mass. Voltages much higher than the 100 V in this problem are typically used in electron guns. Those higher
voltages produce electron speeds so great that relativistic effects must be taken into account. That is why a low
voltage is considered (accurately) in this example.
19.2 Electric Potential in a Uniform Electric Field
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the relationship between voltage and electric field.
• Derive an expression for the electric potential and electric field.
• Calculate electric field strength given distance and voltage.
In the previous section, we explored the relationship between voltage and energy. In this section, we will explore
the relationship between voltage and electric field. For example, a uniform electric field is produced by placing a
potential difference (or voltage) across two parallel metal plates, labeled A and B. (SeeFigure 19.5.) Examining
this will tell us what voltage is needed to produce a certain electric field strength; it will also reveal a more
fundamental relationship between electric potential and electric field. From a physicist’s point of view, either or
can be used to describe any charge distribution. is most closely tied to energy, whereas is most closely
related to force. is ascalarquantity and has no direction, while is avectorquantity, having both magnitude
and direction. (Note that the magnitude of the electric field strength, a scalar quantity, is represented by below.)
The relationship between and is revealed by calculating the work done by the force in moving a charge from
point A to point B. But, as noted inElectric Potential Energy: Potential Difference, this is complex for arbitrary charge
distributions, requiring calculus. We therefore look at a uniform electric field as an interesting special case.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 843
19.2 • Electric Potential in a Uniform Electric Field 825
FIGURE19.5The relationship between and for parallel conducting plates is . (Note that in magnitude. For a
charge that is moved from plate A at higher potential to plate B at lower potential, a minus sign needs to be included as follows:
. See the text for details.)
The work done by the electric field inFigure 19.5to move a positive charge from A, the positive plate, higher
potential, to B, the negative plate, lower potential, is
19.21
The potential difference between points A and B is
19.22
Entering this into the expression for work yields
19.23
Work is ; here , since the path is parallel to the field, and so . Since , we
see that . Substituting this expression for work into the previous equation gives
19.24
The charge cancels, and so the voltage between points A and B is seen to be
19.25
where is the distance from A to B, or the distance between the plates inFigure 19.5. Note that the above equation
implies the units for electric field are volts per meter. We already know the units for electric field are newtons per
coulomb; thus the following relation among units is valid:
19.26
Voltage between Points A and B
19.27
where is the distance from A to B, or the distance between the plates.
PAGE: 844
826 19 • Electric Potential and Electric Field
EXAMPLE 19.4
What Is the Highest Voltage Possible between Two Plates?
Dry air will support a maximum electric field strength of about × . Above that value, the field creates
enough ionization in the air to make the air a conductor. This allows a discharge or spark that reduces the field.
What, then, is the maximum voltage between two parallel conducting plates separated by 2.5 cm of dry air?
Strategy
We are given the maximum electric field between the plates and the distance between them. The equation
can thus be used to calculate the maximum voltage.
Solution
The potential difference or voltage between the plates is
19.28
Entering the given values for and gives
× × 19.29
or
19.30
(The answer is quoted to only two digits, since the maximum field strength is approximate.)
Discussion
One of the implications of this result is that it takes about 75 kV to make a spark jump across a 2.5 cm (1 in.) gap, or
150 kV for a 5 cm spark. This limits the voltages that can exist between conductors, perhaps on a power
transmission line. A smaller voltage will cause a spark if there are points on the surface, since points create greater
fields than smooth surfaces. Humid air breaks down at a lower field strength, meaning that a smaller voltage will
make a spark jump through humid air. The largest voltages can be built up, say with static electricity, on dry days.
FIGURE19.6A spark chamber is used to trace the paths of high-energy particles. Ionization created by the particles as they pass through
the gas between the plates allows a spark to jump. The sparks are perpendicular to the plates, following electric field lines between them.
The potential difference between adjacent plates is not high enough to cause sparks without the ionization produced by particles from
accelerator experiments (or cosmic rays). (credit: Daderot, Wikimedia Commons)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 845
19.2 • Electric Potential in a Uniform Electric Field 827
EXAMPLE 19.5
Field and Force inside an Electron Gun
(a) An electron gun has parallel plates separated by 4.00 cm and gives electrons 25.0 keV of energy. What is the
electric field strength between the plates? (b) What force would this field exert on a piece of plastic with a
charge that gets between the plates?
Strategy
Since the voltage and plate separation are given, the electric field strength can be calculated directly from the
expression . Once the electric field strength is known, the force on a charge is found using . Since
the electric field is in only one direction, we can write this equation in terms of the magnitudes, .
Solution for (a)
The expression for the magnitude of the electric field between two uniform metal plates is
19.31
Since the electron is a single charge and is given 25.0 keV of energy, the potential difference must be 25.0 kV.
Entering this value for and the plate separation of 0.0400 m, we obtain
× 19.32
Solution for (b)
The magnitude of the force on a charge in an electric field is obtained from the equation
19.33
Substituting known values gives
× × 19.34
Discussion
Note that the units are newtons, since . The force on the charge is the same no matter where the
charge is located between the plates. This is because the electric field is uniform between the plates.
In more general situations, regardless of whether the electric field is uniform, it points in the direction of decreasing
potential, because the force on a positive charge is in the direction of and also in the direction of lower potential
. Furthermore, the magnitude of equals the rate of decrease of with distance. The faster decreases over
distance, the greater the electric field. In equation form, the general relationship between voltage and electric field
is
19.35
where is the distance over which the change in potential, , takes place. The minus sign tells us that points
in the direction of decreasing potential. The electric field is said to be thegradient(as in grade or slope) of the
electric potential.
Relationship between Voltage and Electric Field
In equation form, the general relationship between voltage and electric field is
PAGE: 846
828 19 • Electric Potential and Electric Field
19.36
where is the distance over which the change in potential, , takes place. The minus sign tells us that
points in the direction of decreasing potential. The electric field is said to be thegradient(as in grade or slope) of
the electric potential.
For continually changing potentials, and become infinitesimals and differential calculus must be employed
to determine the electric field.
19.3 Electrical Potential Due to a Point Charge
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain point charges and express the equation for electric potential of a point charge.
• Distinguish between electric potential and electric field.
• Determine the electric potential of a point charge given charge and distance.
Point charges, such as electrons, are among the fundamental building blocks of matter. Furthermore, spherical
charge distributions (like on a metal sphere) create external electric fields exactly like a point charge. The electric
potential due to a point charge is, thus, a case we need to consider. Using calculus to find the work needed to move
a test charge from a large distance away to a distance of from a point charge , and noting the connection
between work and potential , it can be shown that theelectric potential of a point chargeis
19.37
wherekis a constant equal to .
Electric Potential of a Point Charge
The electric potential of a point charge is given by
19.38
The potential at infinity is chosen to be zero. Thus for a point charge decreases with distance, whereas for a
point charge decreases with distance squared:
19.39
Recall that the electric potential is a scalar and has no direction, whereas the electric field is a vector. To find
the voltage due to a combination of point charges, you add the individual voltages as numbers. To find the total
electric field, you must add the individual fields asvectors, taking magnitude and direction into account. This is
consistent with the fact that is closely associated with energy, a scalar, whereas is closely associated with
force, a vector.
EXAMPLE 19.6
What Voltage Is Produced by a Small Charge on a Metal Sphere?
Charges in static electricity are typically in the nanocoulomb to microcoulomb range. What is the voltage
5.00 cm away from the center of a 1-cm diameter metal sphere that has a static charge?
Strategy
As we have discussed inElectric Charge and Electric Field, charge on a metal sphere spreads out uniformly and
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 847
19.3 • Electrical Potential Due to a Point Charge 829
produces a field like that of a point charge located at its center. Thus we can find the voltage using the equation
.
Solution
Entering known values into the expression for the potential of a point charge, we obtain
19.40
Discussion
The negative value for voltage means a positive charge would be attracted from a larger distance, since the potential
is lower (more negative) than at larger distances. Conversely, a negative charge would be repelled, as expected.
EXAMPLE 19.7
What Is the Excess Charge on a Van de Graaff Generator
A demonstration Van de Graaff generator has a 25.0 cm diameter metal sphere that produces a voltage of 100 kV
near its surface. (SeeFigure 19.7.) What excess charge resides on the sphere? (Assume that each numerical value
here is shown with three significant figures.)
FIGURE19.7The voltage of this demonstration Van de Graaff generator is measured between the charged sphere and ground. Earth’s
potential is taken to be zero as a reference. The potential of the charged conducting sphere is the same as that of an equal point charge at
its center.
Strategy
The potential on the surface will be the same as that of a point charge at the center of the sphere, 12.5 cm away.
(The radius of the sphere is 12.5 cm.) We can thus determine the excess charge using the equation
19.41
Solution
Solving for and entering known values gives
PAGE: 848
830 19 • Electric Potential and Electric Field
×
19.42
×
×
Discussion
This is a relatively small charge, but it produces a rather large voltage. We have another indication here that it is
difficult to store isolated charges.
The voltages in both of these examples could be measured with a meter that compares the measured potential with
ground potential. Ground potential is often taken to be zero (instead of taking the potential at infinity to be zero). It
is the potential difference between two points that is of importance, and very often there is a tacit assumption that
some reference point, such as Earth or a very distant point, is at zero potential. As noted inElectric Potential Energy:
Potential Difference, this is analogous to taking sea level as when considering gravitational potential energy,
.
19.4 Equipotential Lines
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain equipotential lines and equipotential surfaces.
• Describe the action of grounding an electrical appliance.
• Compare electric field and equipotential lines.
We can represent electric potentials (voltages) pictorially, just as we drew pictures to illustrate electric fields. Of
course, the two are related. ConsiderFigure 19.8, which shows an isolated positive point charge and its electric field
lines. Electric field lines radiate out from a positive charge and terminate on negative charges. While we use blue
arrows to represent the magnitude and direction of the electric field, we use green lines to represent places where
the electric potential is constant. These are calledequipotential linesin two dimensions, orequipotential surfaces
in three dimensions. The termequipotentialis also used as a noun, referring to an equipotential line or surface. The
potential for a point charge is the same anywhere on an imaginary sphere of radius surrounding the charge. This is
true since the potential for a point charge is given by and, thus, has the same value at any point that is a
given distance from the charge. An equipotential sphere is a circle in the two-dimensional view ofFigure 19.8.
Since the electric field lines point radially away from the charge, they are perpendicular to the equipotential lines.
FIGURE19.8An isolated point charge with its electric field lines in blue and equipotential lines in green. The potential is the same along
each equipotential line, meaning that no work is required to move a charge anywhere along one of those lines. Work is needed to move a
charge from one equipotential line to another. Equipotential lines are perpendicular to electric field lines in every case.
It is important to note thatequipotential lines are always perpendicular to electric field lines. No work is required to
move a charge along an equipotential, since . Thus the work is
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 849
19.4 • Equipotential Lines 831
19.43
Work is zero if force is perpendicular to motion. Force is in the same direction as , so that motion along an
equipotential must be perpendicular to . More precisely, work is related to the electric field by
19.44
Note that in the above equation, and symbolize the magnitudes of the electric field strength and force,
respectively. Neither nor nor is zero, and so must be 0, meaning must be . In other words, motion
along an equipotential is perpendicular to .
One of the rules for static electric fields and conductors is that the electric field must be perpendicular to the
surface of any conductor. This implies that aconductor is an equipotential surface in static situations. There can be
no voltage difference across the surface of a conductor, or charges will flow. One of the uses of this fact is that a
conductor can be fixed at zero volts by connecting it to the earth with a good conductor—a process called
grounding. Grounding can be a useful safety tool. For example, grounding the metal case of an electrical appliance
ensures that it is at zero volts relative to the earth.
Grounding
A conductor can be fixed at zero volts by connecting it to the earth with a good conductor—a process called
grounding.
Because a conductor is an equipotential, it can replace any equipotential surface. For example, inFigure 19.8a
charged spherical conductor can replace the point charge, and the electric field and potential surfaces outside of it
will be unchanged, confirming the contention that a spherical charge distribution is equivalent to a point charge at
its center.
Figure 19.9shows the electric field and equipotential lines for two equal and opposite charges. Given the electric
field lines, the equipotential lines can be drawn simply by making them perpendicular to the electric field lines.
Conversely, given the equipotential lines, as inFigure 19.10(a), the electric field lines can be drawn by making them
perpendicular to the equipotentials, as inFigure 19.10(b).
FIGURE19.9The electric field lines and equipotential lines for two equal but opposite charges. The equipotential lines can be drawn by
making them perpendicular to the electric field lines, if those are known. Note that the potential is greatest (most positive) near the positive
charge and least (most negative) near the negative charge.
PAGE: 850
832 19 • Electric Potential and Electric Field
FIGURE19.10(a) These equipotential lines might be measured with a voltmeter in a laboratory experiment. (b) The corresponding electric
field lines are found by drawing them perpendicular to the equipotentials. Note that these fields are consistent with two equal negative
charges.
One of the most important cases is that of the familiar parallel conducting plates shown inFigure 19.11. Between
the plates, the equipotentials are evenly spaced and parallel. The same field could be maintained by placing
conducting plates at the equipotential lines at the potentials shown.
FIGURE19.11The electric field and equipotential lines between two metal plates.
An important application of electric fields and equipotential lines involves the heart. The heart relies on electrical
signals to maintain its rhythm. The movement of electrical signals causes the chambers of the heart to contract and
relax. When a person has a heart attack, the movement of these electrical signals may be disturbed. An artificial
pacemaker and a defibrillator can be used to initiate the rhythm of electrical signals. The equipotential lines around
the heart, the thoracic region, and the axis of the heart are useful ways of monitoring the structure and functions of
the heart. An electrocardiogram (ECG) measures the small electric signals being generated during the activity of the
heart. More about the relationship between electric fields and the heart is discussed inEnergy Stored in Capacitors.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Charges and Fields
Move point charges around on the playing field and then view the electric field, voltages, equipotential lines, and
more. It's colorful, it's dynamic, it's free.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/19-4-equipotential-lines)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 851
19.5 • Capacitors and Dielectrics 833
19.5 Capacitors and Dielectrics
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the action of a capacitor and define capacitance.
• Explain parallel plate capacitors and their capacitances.
• Discuss the process of increasing the capacitance of a dielectric.
• Determine capacitance given charge and voltage.
Acapacitoris a device used to store electric charge. Capacitors have applications ranging from filtering static out of
radio reception to energy storage in heart defibrillators. Typically, commercial capacitors have two conducting parts
close to one another, but not touching, such as those inFigure 19.12. (Most of the time an insulator is used between
the two plates to provide separation—see the discussion on dielectrics below.) When battery terminals are
connected to an initially uncharged capacitor, equal amounts of positive and negative charge, and , are
separated into its two plates. The capacitor remains neutral overall, but we refer to it as storing a charge in this
circumstance.
Capacitor
A capacitor is a device used to store electric charge.
FIGURE19.12Both capacitors shown here were initially uncharged before being connected to a battery. They now have separated charges
of and on their two halves. (a) A parallel plate capacitor. (b) A rolled capacitor with an insulating material between its two
conducting sheets.
The amount of charge acapacitorcan store depends on two major factors—the voltage applied and the
capacitor’s physical characteristics, such as its size.
The Amount of Charge a Capacitor Can Store
The amount of charge acapacitorcan store depends on two major factors—the voltage applied and the
capacitor’s physical characteristics, such as its size.
PAGE: 852
834 19 • Electric Potential and Electric Field
A system composed of two identical, parallel conducting plates separated by a distance, as inFigure 19.13, is called
aparallel plate capacitor. It is easy to see the relationship between the voltage and the stored charge for a parallel
plate capacitor, as shown inFigure 19.13. Each electric field line starts on an individual positive charge and ends on
a negative one, so that there will be more field lines if there is more charge. (Drawing a single field line per charge is
a convenience, only. We can draw many field lines for each charge, but the total number is proportional to the
number of charges.) The electric field strength is, thus, directly proportional to .
FIGURE19.13Electric field lines in this parallel plate capacitor, as always, start on positive charges and end on negative charges. Since the
electric field strength is proportional to the density of field lines, it is also proportional to the amount of charge on the capacitor.
The field is proportional to the charge:
19.45
where the symbol means “proportional to.” From the discussion inElectric Potential in a Uniform Electric Field,
we know that the voltage across parallel plates is . Thus,
19.46
It follows, then, that ∝ , and conversely,
19.47
This is true in general: The greater the voltage applied to any capacitor, the greater the charge stored in it.
Different capacitors will store different amounts of charge for the same applied voltage, depending on their physical
characteristics. We define theircapacitance to be such that the charge stored in a capacitor is proportional to
. The charge stored in a capacitor is given by
19.48
This equation expresses the two major factors affecting the amount of charge stored. Those factors are the physical
characteristics of the capacitor, , and the voltage, . Rearranging the equation, we see thatcapacitance is the
amount of charge stored per volt,or
19.49
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 853
19.5 • Capacitors and Dielectrics 835
Capacitance
Capacitance is the amount of charge stored per volt, or
19.50
The unit of capacitance is the farad (F), named for Michael Faraday (1791–1867), an English scientist who
contributed to the fields of electromagnetism and electrochemistry. Since capacitance is charge per unit voltage, we
see that a farad is a coulomb per volt, or
19.51
A 1-farad capacitor would be able to store 1 coulomb (a very large amount of charge) with the application of only 1
volt. One farad is, thus, a very large capacitance. Typical capacitors range from fractions of a picofarad
to millifarads .
Figure 19.14shows some common capacitors. Capacitors are primarily made of ceramic, glass, or plastic,
depending upon purpose and size. Insulating materials, called dielectrics, are commonly used in their construction,
as discussed below.
FIGURE19.14Some typical capacitors. Size and value of capacitance are not necessarily related. (credit: Windell Oskay)
Parallel Plate Capacitor
The parallel plate capacitor shown inFigure 19.15has two identical conducting plates, each having a surface area
, separated by a distance (with no material between the plates). When a voltage is applied to the capacitor, it
stores a charge , as shown. We can see how its capacitance depends on and by considering the characteristics
of the Coulomb force. We know that like charges repel, unlike charges attract, and the force between charges
decreases with distance. So it seems quite reasonable that the bigger the plates are, the more charge they can
store—because the charges can spread out more. Thus should be greater for larger . Similarly, the closer the
plates are together, the greater the attraction of the opposite charges on them. So should be greater for smaller .
PAGE: 854
836 19 • Electric Potential and Electric Field
FIGURE19.15Parallel plate capacitor with plates separated by a distance . Each plate has an area .
It can be shown that for a parallel plate capacitor there are only two factors ( and ) that affect its capacitance .
The capacitance of a parallel plate capacitor in equation form is given by
19.52
Capacitance of a Parallel Plate Capacitor
19.53
is the area of one plate in square meters, and is the distance between the plates in meters. The constant is
the permittivity of free space; its numerical value in SI units is . The units of F/m are
equivalent to . The small numerical value of is related to the large size of the farad. A parallel plate
capacitor must have a large area to have a capacitance approaching a farad. (Note that the above equation is valid
when the parallel plates are separated by air or free space. When another material is placed between the plates, the
equation is modified, as discussed below.)
EXAMPLE 19.8
Capacitance and Charge Stored in a Parallel Plate Capacitor
(a) What is the capacitance of a parallel plate capacitor with metal plates, each of area , separated by 1.00
mm? (b) What charge is stored in this capacitor if a voltage of is applied to it?
Strategy
Finding the capacitance is a straightforward application of the equation . Once is found, the charge
stored can be found using the equation .
Solution for (a)
Entering the given values into the equation for the capacitance of a parallel plate capacitor yields
19.54
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 855
19.5 • Capacitors and Dielectrics 837
Discussion for (a)
This small value for the capacitance indicates how difficult it is to make a device with a large capacitance. Special
techniques help, such as using very large area thin foils placed close together.
Solution for (b)
The charge stored in any capacitor is given by the equation . Entering the known values into this equation
gives
×
19.55
Discussion for (b)
This charge is only slightly greater than those found in typical static electricity. Since air breaks down at about
, more charge cannot be stored on this capacitor by increasing the voltage.
Another interesting biological example dealing with electric potential is found in the cell’s plasma membrane. The
membrane sets a cell off from its surroundings and also allows ions to selectively pass in and out of the cell. There is
a potential difference across the membrane of about . This is due to the mainly negatively charged ions in
the cell and the predominance of positively charged sodium ( ) ions outside. Things change when a nerve cell is
stimulated. ions are allowed to pass through the membrane into the cell, producing a positive membrane
potential—the nerve signal. The cell membrane is about 7 to 10 nm thick. An approximate value of the electric field
across it is given by
19.56
This electric field is enough to cause a breakdown in air.
Dielectric
The previous example highlights the difficulty of storing a large amount of charge in capacitors. If is made smaller
to produce a larger capacitance, then the maximum voltage must be reduced proportionally to avoid breakdown
(since ). An important solution to this difficulty is to put an insulating material, called adielectric, between
the plates of a capacitor and allow to be as small as possible. Not only does the smaller make the capacitance
greater, but many insulators can withstand greater electric fields than air before breaking down.
There is another benefit to using a dielectric in a capacitor. Depending on the material used, the capacitance is
greater than that given by the equation by a factor , called thedielectric constant. A parallel plate
capacitor with a dielectric between its plates has a capacitance given by
19.57
Values of the dielectric constant for various materials are given inTable 19.1. Note that for vacuum is exactly 1,
and so the above equation is valid in that case, too. If a dielectric is used, perhaps by placing Teflon between the
plates of the capacitor inExample 19.8, then the capacitance is greater by the factor , which for Teflon is 2.1.
Take-Home Experiment: Building a Capacitor
How large a capacitor can you make using a chewing gum wrapper? The plates will be the aluminum foil, and the
separation (dielectric) in between will be the paper.
PAGE: 856
838 19 • Electric Potential and Electric Field
Material Dielectric constant Dielectric strength (V/m)
Vacuum 1.00000 —
Air 1.00059
Bakelite 4.9
Fused quartz 3.78
Neoprene rubber 6.7
Nylon 3.4
Paper 3.7
Polystyrene 2.56
Pyrex glass 5.6
Silicon oil 2.5
Strontium titanate 233
Teflon 2.1
Water 80 —
TABLE19.1Dielectric Constants and Dielectric Strengths for Various
Materials at 20ºC
Note also that the dielectric constant for air is very close to 1, so that air-filled capacitors act much like those with
vacuum between their platesexceptthat the air can become conductive if the electric field strength becomes too
great. (Recall that for a parallel plate capacitor.) Also shown inTable 19.1are maximum electric field
strengths in V/m, calleddielectric strengths, for several materials. These are the fields above which the material
begins to break down and conduct. The dielectric strength imposes a limit on the voltage that can be applied for a
given plate separation. For instance, inExample 19.8, the separation is 1.00 mm, and so the voltage limit for air is
19.58
However, the limit for a 1.00 mm separation filled with Teflon is 60,000 V, since the dielectric strength of Teflon is
V/m. So the same capacitor filled with Teflon has a greater capacitance and can be subjected to a much
greater voltage. Using the capacitance we calculated in the above example for the air-filled parallel plate capacitor,
we find that the Teflon-filled capacitor can store a maximum charge of
19.59
This is 42 times the charge of the same air-filled capacitor.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 857
19.5 • Capacitors and Dielectrics 839
Dielectric Strength
The maximum electric field strength above which an insulating material begins to break down and conduct is
called its dielectric strength.
Microscopically, how does a dielectric increase capacitance? Polarization of the insulator is responsible. The more
easily it is polarized, the greater its dielectric constant . Water, for example, is apolar moleculebecause one end
of the molecule has a slight positive charge and the other end has a slight negative charge. The polarity of water
causes it to have a relatively large dielectric constant of 80. The effect of polarization can be best explained in terms
of the characteristics of the Coulomb force.Figure 19.16shows the separation of charge schematically in the
molecules of a dielectric material placed between the charged plates of a capacitor. The Coulomb force between the
closest ends of the molecules and the charge on the plates is attractive and very strong, since they are very close
together. This attracts more charge onto the plates than if the space were empty and the opposite charges were a
distance away.
FIGURE19.16(a) The molecules in the insulating material between the plates of a capacitor are polarized by the charged plates. This
produces a layer of opposite charge on the surface of the dielectric that attracts more charge onto the plate, increasing its capacitance. (b)
The dielectric reduces the electric field strength inside the capacitor, resulting in a smaller voltage between the plates for the same charge.
The capacitor stores the same charge for a smaller voltage, implying that it has a larger capacitance because of the dielectric.
Another way to understand how a dielectric increases capacitance is to consider its effect on the electric field inside
the capacitor.Figure 19.16(b) shows the electric field lines with a dielectric in place. Since the field lines end on
charges in the dielectric, there are fewer of them going from one side of the capacitor to the other. So the electric
field strength is less than if there were a vacuum between the plates, even though the same charge is on the plates.
The voltage between the plates is , so it too is reduced by the dielectric. Thus there is a smaller voltage
for the same charge ; since , the capacitance is greater.
The dielectric constant is generally defined to be , or the ratio of the electric field in a vacuum to that in
the dielectric material, and is intimately related to the polarizability of the material.
PAGE: 858
840 19 • Electric Potential and Electric Field
Things Great and Small
The Submicroscopic Origin of Polarization
Polarization is a separation of charge within an atom or molecule. As has been noted, the planetary model of the
atom pictures it as having a positive nucleus orbited by negative electrons, analogous to the planets orbiting the
Sun. Although this model is not completely accurate, it is very helpful in explaining a vast range of phenomena
and will be refined elsewhere, such as inAtomic Physics. The submicroscopic origin of polarization can be
modeled as shown inFigure 19.17.
FIGURE19.17Artist’s conception of a polarized atom. The orbits of electrons around the nucleus are shifted slightly by the external
charges (shown exaggerated). The resulting separation of charge within the atom means that it is polarized. Note that the unlike charge is
now closer to the external charges, causing the polarization.
We will find inAtomic Physicsthat the orbits of electrons are more properly viewed as electron clouds with the
density of the cloud related to the probability of finding an electron in that location (as opposed to the definite
locations and paths of planets in their orbits around the Sun). This cloud is shifted by the Coulomb force so that the
atom on average has a separation of charge. Although the atom remains neutral, it can now be the source of a
Coulomb force, since a charge brought near the atom will be closer to one type of charge than the other.
Some molecules, such as those of water, have an inherent separation of charge and are thus called polar molecules.
Figure 19.18illustrates the separation of charge in a water molecule, which has two hydrogen atoms and one
oxygen atom . The water molecule is not symmetric—the hydrogen atoms are repelled to one side, giving the
molecule a boomerang shape. The electrons in a water molecule are more concentrated around the more highly
charged oxygen nucleus than around the hydrogen nuclei. This makes the oxygen end of the molecule slightly
negative and leaves the hydrogen ends slightly positive. The inherent separation of charge in polar molecules makes
it easier to align them with external fields and charges. Polar molecules therefore exhibit greater polarization effects
and have greater dielectric constants. Those who study chemistry will find that the polar nature of water has many
effects. For example, water molecules gather ions much more effectively because they have an electric field and a
separation of charge to attract charges of both signs. Also, as brought out in the previous chapter, polar water
provides a shield or screening of the electric fields in the highly charged molecules of interest in biological systems.
FIGURE19.18Artist’s conception of a water molecule. There is an inherent separation of charge, and so water is a polar molecule.
Electrons in the molecule are attracted to the oxygen nucleus and leave an excess of positive charge near the two hydrogen nuclei. (Note
that the schematic on the right is a rough illustration of the distribution of electrons in the water molecule. It does not show the actual
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 859
19.6 • Capacitors in Series and Parallel 841
numbers of protons and electrons involved in the structure.)
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Capacitor Lab
Explore how a capacitor works! Change the size of the plates and add a dielectric to see the effect on capacitance.
Change the voltage and see charges built up on the plates. Observe the electric field in the capacitor. Measure the
voltage and the electric field.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/19-5-capacitors-and-dielectrics)
19.6 Capacitors in Series and Parallel
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Derive expressions for total capacitance in series and in parallel.
• Identify series and parallel parts in the combination of connection of capacitors.
• Calculate the effective capacitance in series and parallel given individual capacitances.
Several capacitors may be connected together in a variety of applications. Multiple connections of capacitors act like
a single equivalent capacitor. The total capacitance of this equivalent single capacitor depends both on the
individual capacitors and how they are connected. There are two simple and common types of connections, called
seriesandparallel, for which we can easily calculate the total capacitance. Certain more complicated connections
can also be related to combinations of series and parallel.
Capacitance in Series
Figure 19.19(a) shows a series connection of three capacitors with a voltage applied. As for any capacitor, the
capacitance of the combination is related to charge and voltage by .
Note inFigure 19.19that opposite charges of magnitude flow to either side of the originally uncharged
combination of capacitors when the voltage is applied. Conservation of charge requires that equal-magnitude
charges be created on the plates of the individual capacitors, since charge is only being separated in these originally
neutral devices. The end result is that the combination resembles a single capacitor with an effective plate
separation greater than that of the individual capacitors alone. (SeeFigure 19.19(b).) Larger plate separation means
smaller capacitance. It is a general feature of series connections of capacitors that the total capacitance is less than
any of the individual capacitances.
PAGE: 860
842 19 • Electric Potential and Electric Field
FIGURE19.19(a) Capacitors connected in series. The magnitude of the charge on each plate is . (b) An equivalent capacitor has a larger
plate separation . Series connections produce a total capacitance that is less than that of any of the individual capacitors.
We can find an expression for the total capacitance by considering the voltage across the individual capacitors
shown inFigure 19.19. Solving for gives . The voltages across the individual capacitors are thus
, , and . The total voltage is the sum of the individual voltages:
19.60
Now, calling the total capacitance for series capacitance, consider that
19.61
Entering the expressions for , , and , we get
19.62
Canceling the s, we obtain the equation for the total capacitance in series to be
19.63
where “...” indicates that the expression is valid for any number of capacitors connected in series. An expression of
this form always results in a total capacitance that is less than any of the individual capacitances , , ..., as
the next example illustrates.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 861
19.6 • Capacitors in Series and Parallel 843
Total Capacitance in Series,
Total capacitance in series:
EXAMPLE 19.9
What Is the Series Capacitance?
Find the total capacitance for three capacitors connected in series, given their individual capacitances are 1.000,
5.000, and 8.000 .
Strategy
With the given information, the total capacitance can be found using the equation for capacitance in series.
Solution
Entering the given capacitances into the expression for gives .
19.64
Inverting to find yields .
Discussion
The total series capacitance is less than the smallest individual capacitance, as promised. In series connections
of capacitors, the sum is less than the parts. In fact, it is less than any individual. Note that it is sometimes possible,
and more convenient, to solve an equation like the above by finding the least common denominator, which in this
case (showing only whole-number calculations) is 40. Thus,
19.65
so that
19.66
Capacitors in Parallel
Figure 19.20(a) shows a parallel connection of three capacitors with a voltage applied. Here the total capacitance is
easier to find than in the series case. To find the equivalent total capacitance , we first note that the voltage
across each capacitor is , the same as that of the source, since they are connected directly to it through a
conductor. (Conductors are equipotentials, and so the voltage across the capacitors is the same as that across the
voltage source.) Thus the capacitors have the same charges on them as they would have if connected individually to
the voltage source. The total charge is the sum of the individual charges:
19.67
PAGE: 862
844 19 • Electric Potential and Electric Field
FIGURE19.20(a) Capacitors in parallel. Each is connected directly to the voltage source just as if it were all alone, and so the total
capacitance in parallel is just the sum of the individual capacitances. (b) The equivalent capacitor has a larger plate area and can therefore
hold more charge than the individual capacitors.
Using the relationship , we see that the total charge is , and the individual charges are
, ,and . Entering these into the previous equation gives
19.68
Canceling from the equation, we obtain the equation for the total capacitance in parallel :
19.69
Total capacitance in parallel is simply the sum of the individual capacitances. (Again the “...” indicates the
expression is valid for any number of capacitors connected in parallel.) So, for example, if the capacitors in the
example above were connected in parallel, their capacitance would be
19.70
The equivalent capacitor for a parallel connection has an effectively larger plate area and, thus, a larger capacitance,
as illustrated inFigure 19.20(b).
Total Capacitance in Parallel,
Total capacitance in parallel
More complicated connections of capacitors can sometimes be combinations of series and parallel. (SeeFigure
19.21.) To find the total capacitance of such combinations, we identify series and parallel parts, compute their
capacitances, and then find the total.
FIGURE19.21(a) This circuit contains both series and parallel connections of capacitors. SeeExample 19.10for the calculation of the
overall capacitance of the circuit. (b) and are in series; their equivalent capacitance is less than either of them. (c) Note that
is in parallel with . The total capacitance is, thus, the sum of and .
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 863
19.7 • Energy Stored in Capacitors 845
EXAMPLE 19.10
A Mixture of Series and Parallel Capacitance
Find the total capacitance of the combination of capacitors shown inFigure 19.21. Assume the capacitances in
Figure 19.21are known to three decimal places ( , , and ), and round
your answer to three decimal places.
Strategy
To find the total capacitance, we first identify which capacitors are in series and which are in parallel. Capacitors
and are in series. Their combination, labeled in the figure, is in parallel with .
Solution
Since and are in series, their total capacitance is given by . Entering their values into
the equation gives
19.71
Inverting gives
19.72
This equivalent series capacitance is in parallel with the third capacitor; thus, the total is the sum
19.73
Discussion
This technique of analyzing the combinations of capacitors piece by piece until a total is obtained can be applied to
larger combinations of capacitors.
19.7 Energy Stored in Capacitors
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• List some uses of capacitors.
• Express in equation form the energy stored in a capacitor.
• Explain the function of a defibrillator.
Most of us have seen dramatizations in which medical personnel use adefibrillatorto pass an electric current
through a patient’s heart to get it to beat normally. (ReviewFigure 19.22.) Often realistic in detail, the person
applying the shock directs another person to “make it 400 joules this time.” The energy delivered by the defibrillator
is stored in a capacitor and can be adjusted to fit the situation. SI units of joules are often employed. Less dramatic
is the use of capacitors in microelectronics, such as certain handheld calculators, to supply energy when batteries
are charged. (SeeFigure 19.22.) Capacitors are also used to supply energy for flash lamps on cameras.
PAGE: 864
846 19 • Electric Potential and Electric Field
FIGURE19.22Energy stored in the large capacitor is used to preserve the memory of an electronic calculator when its batteries are
charged. (credit: Kucharek, Wikimedia Commons)
Energy stored in a capacitor is electrical potential energy, and it is thus related to the charge and voltage on the
capacitor. We must be careful when applying the equation for electrical potential energy to a
capacitor. Remember that is the potential energy of a charge going through a voltage . But the capacitor
starts with zero voltage and gradually comes up to its full voltage as it is charged. The first charge placed on a
capacitor experiences a change in voltage , since the capacitor has zero voltage when uncharged. The final
charge placed on a capacitor experiences , since the capacitor now has its full voltage on it. The average
voltage on the capacitor during the charging process is , and so the average voltage experienced by the full
charge is . Thus the energy stored in a capacitor, , is
19.74
where is the charge on a capacitor with a voltage applied. (Note that the energy is not , but .) Charge
and voltage are related to the capacitance of a capacitor by , and so the expression for can be
algebraically manipulated into three equivalent expressions:
19.75
where is the charge and the voltage on a capacitor . The energy is in joules for a charge in coulombs, voltage
in volts, and capacitance in farads.
Energy Stored in Capacitors
The energy stored in a capacitor can be expressed in three ways:
19.76
where is the charge, is the voltage, and is the capacitance of the capacitor. The energy is in joules for a
charge in coulombs, voltage in volts, and capacitance in farads.
In a defibrillator, the delivery of a large charge in a short burst to a set of paddles across a person’s chest can be a
lifesaver. The person’s heart attack might have arisen from the onset of fast, irregular beating of the heart—cardiac
or ventricular fibrillation. The application of a large shock of electrical energy can terminate the arrhythmia and
allow the body’s pacemaker to resume normal patterns. Today it is common for ambulances to carry a defibrillator,
which also uses an electrocardiogram to analyze the patient’s heartbeat pattern. Automated external defibrillators
(AED) are found in many public places (Figure 19.23). These are designed to be used by lay persons. The device
automatically diagnoses the patient’s heart condition and then applies the shock with appropriate energy and
waveform. CPR is recommended in many cases before use of an AED.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 865
19.7 • Energy Stored in Capacitors 847
FIGURE19.23Automated external defibrillators are found in many public places. These portable units provide verbal instructions for use in
the important first few minutes for a person suffering a cardiac attack. (credit: Owain Davies, Wikimedia Commons)
EXAMPLE 19.11
Capacitance in a Heart Defibrillator
A heart defibrillator delivers of energy by discharging a capacitor initially at . What is its
capacitance?
Strategy
We are given and , and we are asked to find the capacitance . Of the three expressions in the equation for
, the most convenient relationship is
19.77
Solution
Solving this expression for and entering the given values yields
×
×
× 19.78
Discussion
This is a fairly large, but manageable, capacitance at .
PAGE: 866
848 19 • Glossary
Glossary
capacitance amount of charge stored per unit volt connecting it to the earth or ground
capacitor a device that stores electric charge mechanical energy sum of the kinetic energy and
defibrillator a machine used to provide an electrical potential energy of a system; this sum is a constant
shock to a heart attack victim's heart in order to parallel plate capacitor two identical conducting
restore the heart's normal rhythmic pattern plates separated by a distance
dielectric an insulating material polar molecule a molecule with inherent separation
dielectric strength the maximum electric field above of charge
which an insulating material begins to break down potential difference (or voltage) change in potential
and conduct energy of a charge moved from one point to another,
electric potential potential energy per unit charge divided by the charge; units of potential difference
electron volt the energy given to a fundamental are joules per coulomb, known as volt
charge accelerated through a potential difference of scalar physical quantity with magnitude but no
one volt direction
equipotential line a line along which the electric vector physical quantity with both magnitude and
potential is constant direction
grounding fixing a conductor at zero volts by
Section Summary
19.1Electric Potential Energy: Potential
Difference
where is the distance over which the change in
• Electric potential is potential energy per unit potential, , takes place. The minus sign tells us
charge. that points in the direction of decreasing
• The potential difference between points A and B, potential.) The electric field is said to be the
, defined to be the change in potential gradient(as in grade or slope) of the electric
energy of a charge moved from A to B, is equal to potential.
the change in potential energy divided by the
19.3Electrical Potential Due to a Point
charge, Potential difference is commonly called
Charge
voltage, represented by the symbol .
• Electric potential of a point charge is .
• Electric potential is a scalar, and electric field is a
• An electron volt is the energy given to a
vector. Addition of voltages as numbers gives the
fundamental charge accelerated through a
voltage due to a combination of point charges,
potential difference of 1 V. In equation form,
whereas addition of individual fields as vectors
gives the total electric field.
×
19.4Equipotential Lines
• An equipotential line is a line along which the
• Mechanical energy is the sum of the kinetic energy electric potential is constant.
and potential energy of a system, that is, • An equipotential surface is a three-dimensional
This sum is a constant. version of equipotential lines.
• Equipotential lines are always perpendicular to
19.2Electric Potential in a Uniform Electric
electric field lines.
Field
• The process by which a conductor can be fixed at
• The voltage between points A and B is zero volts by connecting it to the earth with a good
conductor is called grounding.
19.5Capacitors and Dielectrics
where is the distance from A to B, or the
• Acapacitoris a device used to store charge.
distance between the plates.
• The amount of charge a capacitor can store
• In equation form, the general relationship
depends on two major factors—the voltage applied
between voltage and electric field is
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 867
19 • Conceptual Questions 849
and the capacitor’s physical characteristics, such
as its size.
• Total capacitance in parallel
• The capacitance is the amount of charge stored
per volt,or
• If a circuit contains a combination of capacitors in
series and parallel, identify series and parallel
parts, compute their capacitances, and then find
• The capacitance of a parallel plate capacitor is
the total.
, when the plates are separated by air or
free space. is called the permittivity of free 19.7Energy Stored in Capacitors
space.
• Capacitors are used in a variety of devices,
• A parallel plate capacitor with a dielectric between
including defibrillators, microelectronics such as
its plates has a capacitance given by
calculators, and flash lamps, to supply energy.
• The energy stored in a capacitor can be expressed
where is the dielectric constant of the material. in three ways:
• The maximum electric field strength above which
an insulating material begins to break down and
conduct is called dielectric strength. where is the charge, is the voltage, and is
the capacitance of the capacitor. The energy is in
19.6Capacitors in Series and Parallel
joules when the charge is in coulombs, voltage is in
volts, and capacitance is in farads.
• Total capacitance in series
Conceptual Questions
19.1Electric Potential Energy: Potential 19.3Electrical Potential Due to a Point
Difference Charge
1. Voltage is the common word for potential 9. In what region of space is the potential due to a
difference. Which term is more descriptive, voltage uniformly charged sphere the same as that of a
or potential difference? point charge? In what region does it differ from that
2. If the voltage between two points is zero, can a test of a point charge?
charge be moved between them with zero net work 10. Can the potential of a non-uniformly charged
being done? Can this necessarily be done without sphere be the same as that of a point charge?
exerting a force? Explain. Explain.
3. What is the relationship between voltage and
energy? More precisely, what is the relationship 19.4Equipotential Lines
between potential difference and electric potential
11. What is an equipotential line? What is an
energy?
equipotential surface?
4. Voltages are always measured between two points.
12. Explain in your own words why equipotential lines
Why?
and surfaces must be perpendicular to electric
5. How are units of volts and electron volts related?
field lines.
How do they differ?
13. Can different equipotential lines cross? Explain.
19.2Electric Potential in a Uniform Electric
19.5Capacitors and Dielectrics
Field
14. Does the capacitance of a device depend on the
6. Discuss how potential difference and electric field
applied voltage? What about the charge stored in
strength are related. Give an example.
it?
7. What is the strength of the electric field in a region
15. Use the characteristics of the Coulomb force to
where the electric potential is constant?
explain why capacitance should be proportional to
8. Will a negative charge, initially at rest, move toward
the plate area of a capacitor. Similarly, explain why
higher or lower potential? Explain why.
capacitance should be inversely proportional to
the separation between plates.
PAGE: 868
850 19 • Problems & Exercises
16. Give the reason why a dielectric material
increases capacitance compared with what it
would be with air between the plates of a
capacitor. What is the independent reason that a
dielectric material also allows a greater voltage to
be applied to a capacitor? (The dielectric thus
increases and permits a greater .)
17. How does the polar character of water molecules
help to explain water’s relatively large dielectric
constant? (Figure 19.18) FIGURE19.24The semipermeable membrane of a cell has
18. Sparks will occur between the plates of an air- different concentrations of ions inside and out. Diffusion moves
the (potassium) and (chloride) ions in the directions
filled capacitor at lower voltage when the air is
shown, until the Coulomb force halts further transfer. This results
humid than when dry. Explain why, considering the in a layer of positive charge on the outside, a layer of negative
charge on the inside, and thus a voltage across the cell membrane.
polar character of water molecules.
The membrane is normally impermeable to (sodium ions).
19. Water has a large dielectric constant, but it is
rarely used in capacitors. Explain why. 19.6Capacitors in Series and Parallel
20. Membranes in living cells, including those in
humans, are characterized by a separation of 21. If you wish to store a large amount of energy in a
charge across the membrane. Effectively, the capacitor bank, would you connect capacitors in
membranes are thus charged capacitors with series or parallel? Explain.
important functions related to the potential
19.7Energy Stored in Capacitors
difference across the membrane. Is energy
required to separate these charges in living
22. How does the energy contained in a charged
membranes and, if so, is its source the
capacitor change when a dielectric is inserted,
metabolization of food energy or some other
assuming the capacitor is isolated and its charge
source?
is constant? Does this imply that work was done?
23. What happens to the energy stored in a capacitor
connected to a battery when a dielectric is
inserted? Was work done in the process?
Problems & Exercises
19.1Electric Potential Energy: Potential 4. Integrated Concepts
Difference Singly charged gas ions are accelerated from rest
through a voltage of 13.0 V. At what temperature
1. Find the ratio of speeds of an electron and a
will the average kinetic energy of gas molecules be
negative hydrogen ion (one having an extra
the same as that given these ions?
electron) accelerated through the same voltage,
5. Integrated Concepts
assuming non-relativistic final speeds. Take the
The temperature near the center of the Sun is
mass of the hydrogen ion to be × thought to be 15 million degrees Celsius
2. An evacuated tube uses an accelerating voltage of × . Through what voltage must a singly
40 kV to accelerate electrons to hit a copper plate
charged ion be accelerated to have the same energy
and produce x rays. Non-relativistically, what would
as the average kinetic energy of ions at this
be the maximum speed of these electrons?
temperature?
3. A bare helium nucleus has two positive charges and
6. Integrated Concepts
a mass of × (a) Calculate its kinetic
(a) What is the average power output of a heart
energy in joules at 2.00% of the speed of light. (b) defibrillator that dissipates 400 J of energy in 10.0
What is this in electron volts? (c) What voltage ms? (b) Considering the high-power output, why
would be needed to obtain this energy? doesn’t the defibrillator produce serious burns?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 869
19 • Problems & Exercises 851
7. Integrated Concepts 19.2Electric Potential in a Uniform Electric
A lightning bolt strikes a tree, moving 20.0 C of Field
charge through a potential difference of
13. Show that units of V/m and N/C for electric field
. (a) What energy was dissipated?
strength are indeed equivalent.
(b) What mass of water could be raised from
14. What is the strength of the electric field between
to the boiling point and then boiled by this energy?
two parallel conducting plates separated by 1.00
(c) Discuss the damage that could be caused to the
cm and having a potential difference (voltage)
tree by the expansion of the boiling steam.
between them of ?
8. Integrated Concepts
15. The electric field strength between two parallel
A 12.0 V battery-operated bottle warmer heats
conducting plates separated by 4.00 cm is
50.0 g of glass, of baby formula, and
× . (a) What is the potential
of aluminum from to .
(a) How much charge is moved by the battery? (b) difference between the plates? (b) The plate with
How many electrons per second flow if it takes 5.00 the lowest potential is taken to be at zero volts.
min to warm the formula? (Hint: Assume that the What is the potential 1.00 cm from that plate (and
specific heat of baby formula is about the same as 3.00 cm from the other)?
the specific heat of water.) 16. How far apart are two conducting plates that have
9. Integrated Concepts an electric field strength of
A battery-operated car utilizes a 12.0 V system. between them, if their potential difference is 15.0
Find the charge the batteries must be able to move kV?
in order to accelerate the 750 kg car from rest to 17. (a) Will the electric field strength between two
25.0 m/s, make it climb a high hill, parallel conducting plates exceed the breakdown
and then cause it to travel at a constant 25.0 m/s by strength for air ( ) if the plates are
exerting a force for an hour. separated by 2.00 mm and a potential difference
10. Integrated Concepts of is applied? (b) How close together
Fusion probability is greatly enhanced when can the plates be with this applied voltage?
appropriate nuclei are brought close together, but 18. The voltage across a membrane forming a cell wall
mutual Coulomb repulsion must be overcome. is 80.0 mV and the membrane is 9.00 nm thick.
This can be done using the kinetic energy of high- What is the electric field strength? (The value is
temperature gas ions or by accelerating the nuclei surprisingly large, but correct. Membranes are
toward one another. (a) Calculate the potential discussed inCapacitors and DielectricsandNerve
energy of two singly charged nuclei separated by Conduction—Electrocardiograms.) You may
× by finding the voltage of one at assume a uniform electric field.
19. Membrane walls of living cells have surprisingly
that distance and multiplying by the charge of the
large electric fields across them due to separation
other. (b) At what temperature will atoms of a gas
of ions. (Membranes are discussed in some detail
have an average kinetic energy equal to this
inNerve Conduction—Electrocardiograms.) What
needed electrical potential energy?
is the voltage across an 8.00 nm–thick membrane
11. Unreasonable Results
if the electric field strength across it is 5.50 MV/
(a) Find the voltage near a 10.0 cm diameter metal
m? You may assume a uniform electric field.
sphere that has 8.00 C of excess positive charge
20. Two parallel conducting plates are separated by
on it. (b) What is unreasonable about this result?
10.0 cm, and one of them is taken to be at zero
(c) Which assumptions are responsible?
volts. (a) What is the electric field strength
12. Construct Your Own Problem
between them, if the potential 8.00 cm from the
Consider a battery used to supply energy to a
zero volt plate (and 2.00 cm from the other) is 450
cellular phone. Construct a problem in which you
V? (b) What is the voltage between the plates?
determine the energy that must be supplied by the
21. Find the maximum potential difference between
battery, and then calculate the amount of charge it
two parallel conducting plates separated by 0.500
must be able to move in order to supply this
cm of air, given the maximum sustainable electric
energy. Among the things to be considered are the
field strength in air to be .
energy needs and battery voltage. You may need
to look ahead to interpret manufacturer’s battery
ratings in ampere-hours as energy in joules.
PAGE: 870
852 19 • Problems & Exercises
22. A doubly charged ion is accelerated to an energy 32. An electrostatic paint sprayer has a 0.200-m-
of 32.0 keV by the electric field between two diameter metal sphere at a potential of 25.0 kV
parallel conducting plates separated by 2.00 cm. that repels paint droplets onto a grounded object.
What is the electric field strength between the (a) What charge is on the sphere? (b) What charge
plates? must a 0.100-mg drop of paint have to arrive at
23. An electron is to be accelerated in a uniform the object with a speed of 10.0 m/s?
electric field having a strength of . 33. In one of the classic nuclear physics experiments
(a) What energy in keV is given to the electron if it at the beginning of the 20th century, an alpha
is accelerated through 0.400 m? (b) Over what particle was accelerated toward a gold nucleus,
distance would it have to be accelerated to and its path was substantially deflected by the
increase its energy by 50.0 GeV? Coulomb interaction. If the energy of the doubly
charged alpha nucleus was 5.00 MeV, how close
19.3Electrical Potential Due to a Point to the gold nucleus (79 protons) could it come
Charge before being deflected?
34. (a) What is the potential between two points
24. A 0.500 cm diameter plastic sphere, used in a
situated 10 cm and 20 cm from a point
static electricity demonstration, has a uniformly
charge? (b) To what location should the point at 20
distributed 40.0 pC charge on its surface. What is
cm be moved to increase this potential difference
the potential near its surface?
by a factor of two?
25. What is the potential from a
35. Unreasonable Results
proton (the average distance between the proton
(a) What is the final speed of an electron
and electron in a hydrogen atom)?
accelerated from rest through a voltage of 25.0
26. (a) A sphere has a surface uniformly charged with
MV by a negatively charged Van de Graaff
1.00 C. At what distance from its center is the
terminal?
potential 5.00 MV? (b) What does your answer
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
imply about the practical aspect of isolating such a
(c) Which assumptions are responsible?
large charge?
27. How far from a point charge will the
19.4Equipotential Lines
potential be 100 V? At what distance will it be
36. (a) Sketch the equipotential lines near a point
28. What are the sign and magnitude of a point charge charge + . Indicate the direction of increasing
that produces a potential of at a distance potential. (b) Do the same for a point charge .
of 1.00 mm? 37. Sketch the equipotential lines for the two equal
29. If the potential due to a point charge is positive charges shown inFigure 19.25. Indicate
at a distance of 15.0 m, what are the direction of increasing potential.
the sign and magnitude of the charge?
30. In nuclear fission, a nucleus splits roughly in half.
(a) What is the potential from a
fragment that has 46 protons in it? (b) What is the
potential energy in MeV of a similarly charged
fragment at this distance?
31. A research Van de Graaff generator has a 2.00-m-
diameter metal sphere with a charge of 5.00 mC
on it. (a) What is the potential near its surface? (b)
At what distance from its center is the potential
1.00 MV? (c) An oxygen atom with three missing FIGURE19.25The electric field near two equal positive
charges is directed away from each of the charges.
electrons is released near the Van de Graaff
generator. What is its energy in MeV at this 38. Figure 19.26shows the electric field lines near
distance? two charges and , the first having a
magnitude four times that of the second. Sketch
the equipotential lines for these two charges, and
indicate the direction of increasing potential.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 871
19 • Problems & Exercises 853
39. Sketch the equipotential lines a long distance from 43. (a) Sketch the electric field lines in the vicinity of
the charges shown inFigure 19.26. Indicate the the charged insulator inFigure 19.29. Note its
direction of increasing potential. non-uniform charge distribution. (b) Sketch
equipotential lines surrounding the insulator.
Indicate the direction of increasing potential.
FIGURE19.26The electric field near two charges.
40. Sketch the equipotential lines in the vicinity of two
opposite charges, where the negative charge is FIGURE19.29A charged insulating rod such as might be
three times as great in magnitude as the positive. used in a classroom demonstration.
SeeFigure 19.26for a similar situation. Indicate 44. The naturally occurring electrical field on the
the direction of increasing potential. ground to an open sky point 3.00 m above is 1.13
41. Sketch the equipotential lines in the vicinity of the × 102N/C. This open point in the sky is at a
negatively charged conductor inFigure 19.27. greater electric potential than the ground. (a)
How will these equipotentials look a long distance Calculate the electric potential at this height. (b)
from the object? Sketch electric field and equipotential lines for
this scenario. Calculate the electric potential at
this height. (c) Sketch electric field and
equipotential lines for this scenario.
45. The lesser electric ray (Narcine bancroftii)
maintains an incredible charge on its head and a
FIGURE19.27A negatively charged conductor.
charge equal in magnitude but opposite in sign on
42. Sketch the equipotential lines surrounding the two
its tail (Figure 19.30). (a) Sketch the equipotential
conducting plates shown inFigure 19.28, given
lines surrounding the ray. (b) Sketch the
the top plate is positive and the bottom plate has
equipotentials when the ray is near a ship with a
an equal amount of negative charge. Be certain to
conducting surface. (c) How could this charge
indicate the distribution of charge on the plates. Is
distribution be of use to the ray?
the field strongest where the plates are closest?
Why should it be?
FIGURE19.28
FIGURE19.30Lesser electric ray (Narcine bancroftii)
(credit: National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration,
NOAA's Fisheries Collection).
PAGE: 872
854 19 • Problems & Exercises
19.5Capacitors and Dielectrics 19.6Capacitors in Series and Parallel
46. What charge is stored in a capacitor when 57. Find the total capacitance of the combination of
120 V is applied to it? capacitors inFigure 19.31.
47. Find the charge stored when 5.50 V is applied to
an 8.00 pF capacitor.
48. What charge is stored in the capacitor inExample
19.8?
49. Calculate the voltage applied to a
capacitor when it holds of charge.
50. What voltage must be applied to an 8.00 nF
capacitor to store 0.160 mC of charge?
51. What capacitance is needed to store of
charge at a voltage of 120 V?
52. What is the capacitance of a large Van de Graaff
generator’s terminal, given that it stores 8.00 mC FIGURE19.31A combination of series and parallel
connections of capacitors.
of charge at a voltage of 12.0 MV?
53. Find the capacitance of a parallel plate capacitor 58. Suppose you want a capacitor bank with a total
having plates of area that are separated capacitance of 0.750 F and you possess numerous
by 0.100 mm of Teflon. 1.50 mF capacitors. What is the smallest number
54. (a)What is the capacitance of a parallel plate you could hook together to achieve your goal, and
capacitor having plates of area that are how would you connect them?
separated by 0.0200 mm of neoprene rubber? (b) 59. What total capacitances can you make by
What charge does it hold when 9.00 V is applied to connecting a and an capacitor
it? together?
55. Integrated Concepts 60. Find the total capacitance of the combination of
A prankster applies 450 V to an capacitor capacitors shown inFigure 19.32.
and then tosses it to an unsuspecting victim. The
victim’s finger is burned by the discharge of the
capacitor through 0.200 g of flesh. What is the
temperature increase of the flesh? Is it reasonable
to assume no phase change?
56. Unreasonable Results
(a) A certain parallel plate capacitor has plates of
area , separated by 0.0100 mm of nylon,
and stores 0.170 C of charge. What is the applied
voltage? (b) What is unreasonable about this
FIGURE19.32A combination of series and parallel
result? (c) Which assumptions are responsible or connections of capacitors.
inconsistent?
61. Find the total capacitance of the combination of
capacitors shown inFigure 19.33.
FIGURE19.33A combination of series and parallel
connections of capacitors.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 873
19 • Problems & Exercises 855
62. Unreasonable Results 67. A nervous physicist worries that the two metal
(a) An capacitor is connected in parallel to shelves of his wood frame bookcase might obtain
another capacitor, producing a total capacitance of a high voltage if charged by static electricity,
. What is the capacitance of the second perhaps produced by friction. (a) What is the
capacitor? (b) What is unreasonable about this capacitance of the empty shelves if they have area
result? (c) Which assumptions are unreasonable and are 0.200 m apart? (b) What is
or inconsistent? the voltage between them if opposite charges of
magnitude 2.00 nC are placed on them? (c) To
19.7Energy Stored in Capacitors show that this voltage poses a small hazard,
calculate the energy stored.
63. (a) What is the energy stored in the
68. Show that for a given dielectric material the
capacitor of a heart defibrillator charged to
maximum energy a parallel plate capacitor can
? (b) Find the amount of stored
store is directly proportional to the volume of
charge.
dielectric ( ). Note that the applied
64. In open heart surgery, a much smaller amount of
voltage is limited by the dielectric strength.
energy will defibrillate the heart. (a) What voltage
69. Construct Your Own Problem
is applied to the capacitor of a heart
Consider a heart defibrillator similar to that
defibrillator that stores 40.0 J of energy? (b) Find
discussed inExample 19.11. Construct a problem
the amount of stored charge.
in which you examine the charge stored in the
65. A capacitor is used in conjunction with a
capacitor of a defibrillator as a function of stored
motor. How much energy is stored in it when 119
energy. Among the things to be considered are the
V is applied?
applied voltage and whether it should vary with
66. Suppose you have a 9.00 V battery, a
energy to be delivered, the range of energies
capacitor, and a capacitor. (a) Find the
involved, and the capacitance of the defibrillator.
charge and energy stored if the capacitors are
You may also wish to consider the much smaller
connected to the battery in series. (b) Do the same
energy needed for defibrillation during open-heart
for a parallel connection.
surgery as a variation on this problem.
70. Unreasonable Results
(a) On a particular day, it takes of
electric energy to start a truck’s engine. Calculate
the capacitance of a capacitor that could store
that amount of energy at 12.0 V. (b) What is
unreasonable about this result? (c) Which
assumptions are responsible?
PAGE: 874
856 19 • Problems & Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 875
CHAPTER 20
Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law
FIGURE20.1Electric energy in massive quantities is transmitted from this hydroelectric facility, the Srisailam power station located along
the Krishna River in India, by the movement of charge—that is, by electric current. (credit: Chintohere, Wikimedia Commons)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
20.1Current
20.2Ohm’s Law: Resistance and Simple Circuits
20.3Resistance and Resistivity
20.4Electric Power and Energy
20.5Alternating Current versus Direct Current
20.6Electric Hazards and the Human Body
20.7Nerve Conduction–Electrocardiograms
INTRODUCTION TO ELECTRIC CURRENT, RESISTANCE, AND OHM'S LAW The flicker of numbers on a handheld
calculator, nerve impulses carrying signals of vision to the brain, an ultrasound device sending a signal to a
computer screen, the brain sending a message for a baby to twitch its toes, an electric train pulling its load over a
mountain pass, a hydroelectric plant sending energy to metropolitan and rural users—these and many other
examples of electricity involveelectric current, the movement of charge. Humankind has indeed harnessed
electricity, the basis of technology, to improve our quality of life. Whereas the previous two chapters concentrated
on static electricity and the fundamental force underlying its behavior, the next few chapters will be devoted to
electric and magnetic phenomena involving current. In addition to exploring applications of electricity, we shall gain
new insights into nature—in particular, the fact that all magnetism results from electric current.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/20-introduction-to-electric-current-
resistance-and-ohms-law)
PAGE: 876
858 20 • Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law
20.1 Current
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define electric current, ampere, and drift velocity
• Describe the direction of charge flow in conventional current.
• Use drift velocity to calculate current and vice versa.
Electric Current
Electric current is defined to be the rate at which charge flows. A large current, such as that used to start a truck
engine, moves a large amount of charge in a small time, whereas a small current, such as that used to operate a
hand-held calculator, moves a small amount of charge over a long period of time. In equation form,electric current
is defined to be
20.1
where is the amount of charge passing through a given area in time . (As in previous chapters, initial time is
often taken to be zero, in which case .) (SeeFigure 20.2.) The SI unit for current is theampere(A), named for
the French physicist André-Marie Ampère (1775–1836). Since , we see that an ampere is one coulomb
per second:
20.2
Not only are fuses and circuit breakers rated in amperes (or amps), so are many electrical appliances.
FIGURE20.2The rate of flow of charge is current. An ampere is the flow of one coulomb through an area in one second.
EXAMPLE 20.1
Calculating Currents: Current in a Truck Battery and a Handheld Calculator
(a) What is the current involved when a truck battery sets in motion 720 C of charge in 4.00 s while starting an
engine? (b) How long does it take 1.00 C of charge to flow through a handheld calculator if a 0.300-mA current is
flowing?
Strategy
We can use the definition of current in the equation to find the current in part (a), since charge and time
are given. In part (b), we rearrange the definition of current and use the given values of charge and current to find
the time required.
Solution for (a)
Entering the given values for charge and time into the definition of current gives
20.3
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 877
20.1 • Current 859
Discussion for (a)
This large value for current illustrates the fact that a large charge is moved in a small amount of time. The currents in
these “starter motors” are fairly large because large frictional forces need to be overcome when setting something
in motion.
Solution for (b)
Solving the relationship for time , and entering the known values for charge and current gives
×
20.4
×
Discussion for (b)
This time is slightly less than an hour. The small current used by the hand-held calculator takes a much longer time
to move a smaller charge than the large current of the truck starter. So why can we operate our calculators only
seconds after turning them on? It’s because calculators require very little energy. Such small current and energy
demands allow handheld calculators to operate from solar cells or to get many hours of use out of small batteries.
Remember, calculators do not have moving parts in the same way that a truck engine has with cylinders and pistons,
so the technology requires smaller currents.
Figure 20.3shows a simple circuit and the standard schematic representation of a battery, conducting path, and
load (a resistor). Schematics are very useful in visualizing the main features of a circuit. A single schematic can
represent a wide variety of situations. The schematic inFigure 20.3(b), for example, can represent anything from a
truck battery connected to a headlight lighting the street in front of the truck to a small battery connected to a
penlight lighting a keyhole in a door. Such schematics are useful because the analysis is the same for a wide variety
of situations. We need to understand a few schematics to apply the concepts and analysis to many more situations.
FIGURE20.3(a) A simple electric circuit. A closed path for current to flow through is supplied by conducting wires connecting a load to the
terminals of a battery. (b) In this schematic, the battery is represented by the two parallel red lines, conducting wires are shown as straight
lines, and the zigzag represents the load. The schematic represents a wide variety of similar circuits.
Note that the direction of current flow inFigure 20.3is from positive to negative.The direction of conventional
current is the direction that positive charge would flow. Depending on the situation, positive charges, negative
PAGE: 878
860 20 • Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law
charges, or both may move. In metal wires, for example, current is carried by electrons—that is, negative charges
move. In ionic solutions, such as salt water, both positive and negative charges move. This is also true in nerve cells.
A Van de Graaff generator used for nuclear research can produce a current of pure positive charges, such as protons.
Figure 20.4illustrates the movement of charged particles that compose a current. The fact that conventional current
is taken to be in the direction that positive charge would flow can be traced back to American politician and scientist
Benjamin Franklin in the 1700s. He named the type of charge associated with electrons negative, long before they
were known to carry current in so many situations. Franklin, in fact, was totally unaware of the small-scale structure
of electricity.
It is important to realize that there is an electric field in conductors responsible for producing the current, as
illustrated inFigure 20.4. Unlike static electricity, where a conductor in equilibrium cannot have an electric field in it,
conductors carrying a current have an electric field and are not in static equilibrium. An electric field is needed to
supply energy to move the charges.
Making Connections: Take-Home Investigation—Electric Current Illustration
Find a straw and little peas that can move freely in the straw. Place the straw flat on a table and fill the straw
with peas. When you pop one pea in at one end, a different pea should pop out the other end. This
demonstration is an analogy for an electric current. Identify what compares to the electrons and what compares
to the supply of energy. What other analogies can you find for an electric current?
Note that the flow of peas is based on the peas physically bumping into each other; electrons flow due to
mutually repulsive electrostatic forces.
FIGURE20.4Current is the rate at which charge moves through an area , such as the cross-section of a wire. Conventional current is
defined to move in the direction of the electric field. (a) Positive charges move in the direction of the electric field and the same direction as
conventional current. (b) Negative charges move in the direction opposite to the electric field. Conventional current is in the direction
opposite to the movement of negative charge. The flow of electrons is sometimes referred to as electronic flow.
EXAMPLE 20.2
Calculating the Number of Electrons that Move through a Calculator
If the 0.300-mA current through the calculator mentioned in theExample 20.1example is carried by electrons, how
many electrons per second pass through it?
Strategy
The current calculated in the previous example was defined for the flow of positive charge. For electrons, the
magnitude is the same, but the sign is opposite, .Since each electron has a
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 879
20.1 • Current 861
charge of , we can convert the current in coulombs per second to electrons per second.
Solution
Starting with the definition of current, we have
20.5
We divide this by the charge per electron, so that
×
×
×
20.6
×
Discussion
There are so many charged particles moving, even in small currents, that individual charges are not noticed, just as
individual water molecules are not noticed in water flow. Even more amazing is that they do not always keep moving
forward like soldiers in a parade. Rather they are like a crowd of people with movement in different directions but a
general trend to move forward. There are lots of collisions with atoms in the metal wire and, of course, with other
electrons.
Drift Velocity
Electrical signals are known to move very rapidly. Telephone conversations carried by currents in wires cover large
distances without noticeable delays. Lights come on as soon as a switch is flicked. Most electrical signals carried by
currents travel at speeds on the order of , a significant fraction of the speed of light. Interestingly, the
individual charges that make up the current movemuchmore slowly on average, typically drifting at speeds on the
order of . How do we reconcile these two speeds, and what does it tell us about standard conductors?
The high speed of electrical signals results from the fact that the force between charges acts rapidly at a distance.
Thus, when a free charge is forced into a wire, as inFigure 20.5, the incoming charge pushes other charges ahead of
it, which in turn push on charges farther down the line. The density of charge in a system cannot easily be increased,
and so the signal is passed on rapidly. The resulting electrical shock wave moves through the system at nearly the
speed of light. To be precise, this rapidly moving signal or shock wave is a rapidly propagating change in electric
field.
FIGURE20.5When charged particles are forced into this volume of a conductor, an equal number are quickly forced to leave. The repulsion
between like charges makes it difficult to increase the number of charges in a volume. Thus, as one charge enters, another leaves almost
immediately, carrying the signal rapidly forward.
Good conductors have large numbers of free charges in them. In metals, the free charges are free electrons.Figure
20.6shows how free electrons move through an ordinary conductor. The distance that an individual electron can
move between collisions with atoms or other electrons is quite small. The electron paths thus appear nearly
random, like the motion of atoms in a gas. But there is an electric field in the conductor that causes the electrons to
drift in the direction shown (opposite to the field, since they are negative). Thedrift velocity is the average
velocity of the free charges. Drift velocity is quite small, since there are so many free charges. If we have an estimate
of the density of free electrons in a conductor, we can calculate the drift velocity for a given current. The larger the
density, the lower the velocity required for a given current.
PAGE: 880
862 20 • Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law
FIGURE20.6Free electrons moving in a conductor make many collisions with other electrons and atoms. The path of one electron is
shown. The average velocity of the free charges is called the drift velocity, , and it is in the direction opposite to the electric field for
electrons. The collisions normally transfer energy to the conductor, requiring a constant supply of energy to maintain a steady current.
Conduction of Electricity and Heat
Good electrical conductors are often good heat conductors, too. This is because large numbers of free electrons
can carry electrical current and can transport thermal energy.
The free-electron collisions transfer energy to the atoms of the conductor. The electric field does work in moving the
electrons through a distance, but that work does not increase the kinetic energy (nor speed, therefore) of the
electrons. The work is transferred to the conductor’s atoms, possibly increasing temperature. Thus a continuous
power input is required to keep a current flowing. An exception, of course, is found in superconductors, for reasons
we shall explore in a later chapter. Superconductors can have a steady current without a continual supply of
energy—a great energy savings. In contrast, the supply of energy can be useful, such as in a lightbulb filament. The
supply of energy is necessary to increase the temperature of the tungsten filament, so that the filament glows.
Making Connections: Take-Home Investigation—Filament Observations
Find a lightbulb with a filament. Look carefully at the filament and describe its structure. To what points is the
filament connected?
We can obtain an expression for the relationship between current and drift velocity by considering the number of
free charges in a segment of wire, as illustrated inFigure 20.7.The number of free charges per unit volumeis given
the symbol and depends on the material. The shaded segment has a volume , so that the number of free
charges in it is . The charge in this segment is thus , where is the amount of charge on each carrier.
(Recall that for electrons, is .) Current is charge moved per unit time; thus, if all the original
charges move out of this segment in time , the current is
20.7
Note that is the magnitude of the drift velocity, , since the charges move an average distance in a time .
Rearranging terms gives
20.8
where is the current through a wire of cross-sectional area made of a material with a free charge density . The
carriers of the current each have charge and move with a drift velocity of magnitude .
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 881
20.1 • Current 863
FIGURE20.7All the charges in the shaded volume of this wire move out in a time , having a drift velocity of magnitude . See text
for further discussion.
Note that simple drift velocity is not the entire story. The speed of an electron is much greater than its drift velocity.
In addition, not all of the electrons in a conductor can move freely, and those that do might move somewhat faster
or slower than the drift velocity. So what do we mean by free electrons? Atoms in a metallic conductor are packed in
the form of a lattice structure. Some electrons are far enough away from the atomic nuclei that they do not
experience the attraction of the nuclei as much as the inner electrons do. These are the free electrons. They are not
bound to a single atom but can instead move freely among the atoms in a “sea” of electrons. These free electrons
respond by accelerating when an electric field is applied. Of course as they move they collide with the atoms in the
lattice and other electrons, generating thermal energy, and the conductor gets warmer. In an insulator, the
organization of the atoms and the structure do not allow for such free electrons.
EXAMPLE 20.3
Calculating Drift Velocity in a Common Wire
Calculate the drift velocity of electrons in a 12-gauge copper wire (which has a diameter of 2.053 mm) carrying a
20.0-A current, given that there is one free electron per copper atom. (Household wiring often contains 12-gauge
copper wire, and the maximum current allowed in such wire is usually 20 A.) The density of copper is
.
Strategy
We can calculate the drift velocity using the equation . The current is given, and
is the charge of an electron. We can calculate the area of a cross-section of the wire using the
formula where is one-half the given diameter, 2.053 mm. We are given the density of copper,
and the periodic table shows that the atomic mass of copper is 63.54 g/mol. We can use these
two quantities along with Avogadro’s number, to determine the number of free electrons
per cubic meter.
Solution
First, calculate the density of free electrons in copper. There is one free electron per copper atom. Therefore, is the
same as the number of copper atoms per . We can now find as follows:
20.9
The cross-sectional area of the wire is
20.10
Rearranging to isolate drift velocity gives
PAGE: 882
864 20 • Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law
20.11
Discussion
The minus sign indicates that the negative charges are moving in the direction opposite to conventional current. The
small value for drift velocity (on the order of ) confirms that the signal moves on the order of times
faster (about ) than the charges that carry it.
20.2 Ohm’s Law: Resistance and Simple Circuits
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the origin of Ohm’s law.
• Calculate voltages, currents, or resistances with Ohm’s law.
• Explain what an ohmic material is.
• Describe a simple circuit.
What drives current? We can think of various devices—such as batteries, generators, wall outlets, and so on—which
are necessary to maintain a current. All such devices create a potential difference and are loosely referred to as
voltage sources. When a voltage source is connected to a conductor, it applies a potential difference that creates
an electric field. The electric field in turn exerts force on charges, causing current.
Ohm’s Law
The current that flows through most substances is directly proportional to the voltage applied to it. The German
physicist Georg Simon Ohm (1787–1854) was the first to demonstrate experimentally that the current in a metal
wire isdirectly proportional to the voltage applied:
20.12
This important relationship is known asOhm’s law. It can be viewed as a cause-and-effect relationship, with
voltage the cause and current the effect. This is an empirical law like that for friction—an experimentally observed
phenomenon. Such a linear relationship doesn’t always occur.
Resistance and Simple Circuits
If voltage drives current, what impedes it? The electric property that impedes current (crudely similar to friction and
air resistance) is calledresistance . Collisions of moving charges with atoms and molecules in a substance
transfer energy to the substance and limit current. Resistance is defined as inversely proportional to current, or
20.13
Thus, for example, current is cut in half if resistance doubles. Combining the relationships of current to voltage and
current to resistance gives
20.14
This relationship is also called Ohm’s law. Ohm’s law in this form really defines resistance for certain materials.
Ohm’s law (like Hooke’s law) is not universally valid. The many substances for which Ohm’s law holds are called
ohmic. These include good conductors like copper and aluminum, and some poor conductors under certain
circumstances. Ohmic materials have a resistance that is independent of voltage and current . An object that
has simple resistance is called aresistor, even if its resistance is small. The unit for resistance is anohmand is given
the symbol (upper case Greek omega). Rearranging gives , and so the units of resistance are 1
ohm = 1 volt per ampere:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 883
20.2 • Ohm’s Law: Resistance and Simple Circuits 865
20.15
Figure 20.8shows the schematic for a simple circuit. Asimple circuithas a single voltage source and a single
resistor. The wires connecting the voltage source to the resistor can be assumed to have negligible resistance, or
their resistance can be included in .
FIGURE20.8A simple electric circuit in which a closed path for current to flow is supplied by conductors (usually metal wires) connecting a
load to the terminals of a battery, represented by the red parallel lines. The zigzag symbol represents the single resistor and includes any
resistance in the connections to the voltage source.
EXAMPLE 20.4
Calculating Resistance: An Automobile Headlight
What is the resistance of an automobile headlight through which 2.50 A flows when 12.0 V is applied to it?
Strategy
We can rearrange Ohm’s law as stated by and use it to find the resistance.
Solution
Rearranging and substituting known values gives
20.16
Discussion
This is a relatively small resistance, but it is larger than the cold resistance of the headlight. As we shall see in
Resistance and Resistivity, resistance usually increases with temperature, and so the bulb has a lower resistance
when it is first switched on and will draw considerably more current during its brief warm-up period.
Resistances range over many orders of magnitude. Some ceramic insulators, such as those used to support power
lines, have resistances of or more. A dry person may have a hand-to-foot resistance of , whereas the
resistance of the human heart is about . A meter-long piece of large-diameter copper wire may have a
resistance of , and superconductors have no resistance at all (they are non-ohmic). Resistance is related to
the shape of an object and the material of which it is composed, as will be seen inResistance and Resistivity.
Additional insight is gained by solving for yielding
20.17
This expression for can be interpreted as thevoltage drop across a resistor produced by the flow of current . The
phrase dropis often used for this voltage. For instance, the headlight inExample 20.4has an drop of 12.0 V.
If voltage is measured at various points in a circuit, it will be seen to increase at the voltage source and decrease at
the resistor. Voltage is similar to fluid pressure. The voltage source is like a pump, creating a pressure difference,
causing current—the flow of charge. The resistor is like a pipe that reduces pressure and limits flow because of its
resistance. Conservation of energy has important consequences here. The voltage source supplies energy (causing
an electric field and a current), and the resistor converts it to another form (such as thermal energy). In a simple
circuit (one with a single simple resistor), the voltage supplied by the source equals the voltage drop across the
PAGE: 884
866 20 • Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law
resistor, since , and the same flows through each. Thus the energy supplied by the voltage source and
the energy converted by the resistor are equal. (SeeFigure 20.9.)
FIGURE20.9The voltage drop across a resistor in a simple circuit equals the voltage output of the battery.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Making Connections: Conservation of Energy
In a simple electrical circuit, the sole resistor converts energy supplied by the source into another form.
Conservation of energy is evidenced here by the fact that all of the energy supplied by the source is converted to
another form by the resistor alone. We will find that conservation of energy has other important applications in
circuits and is a powerful tool in circuit analysis.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Ohm's Law
See how the equation form of Ohm's law relates to a simple circuit. Adjust the voltage and resistance, and see the
current change according to Ohm's law. The sizes of the symbols in the equation change to match the circuit
diagram.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/20-2-ohms-law-resistance-and-
simple-circuits)
20.3 Resistance and Resistivity
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the concept of resistivity.
• Use resistivity to calculate the resistance of specified configurations of material.
• Use the thermal coefficient of resistivity to calculate the change of resistance with temperature.
Material and Shape Dependence of Resistance
The resistance of an object depends on its shape and the material of which it is composed. The cylindrical resistor in
Figure 20.10is easy to analyze, and, by so doing, we can gain insight into the resistance of more complicated
shapes. As you might expect, the cylinder’s electric resistance is directly proportional to its length , similar to
the resistance of a pipe to fluid flow. The longer the cylinder, the more collisions charges will make with its atoms.
The greater the diameter of the cylinder, the more current it can carry (again similar to the flow of fluid through a
pipe). In fact, is inversely proportional to the cylinder’s cross-sectional area .
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 885
20.3 • Resistance and Resistivity 867
FIGURE20.10A uniform cylinder of length and cross-sectional area . Its resistance to the flow of current is similar to the resistance
posed by a pipe to fluid flow. The longer the cylinder, the greater its resistance. The larger its cross-sectional area , the smaller its
resistance.
For a given shape, the resistance depends on the material of which the object is composed. Different materials offer
different resistance to the flow of charge. We define theresistivity of a substance so that theresistance of an
object is directly proportional to . Resistivity is anintrinsicproperty of a material, independent of its shape or
size. The resistance of a uniform cylinder of length , of cross-sectional area , and made of a material with
resistivity , is
20.18
Table 20.1gives representative values of . The materials listed in the table are separated into categories of
conductors, semiconductors, and insulators, based on broad groupings of resistivities. Conductors have the smallest
resistivities, and insulators have the largest; semiconductors have intermediate resistivities. Conductors have
varying but large free charge densities, whereas most charges in insulators are bound to atoms and are not free to
move. Semiconductors are intermediate, having far fewer free charges than conductors, but having properties that
make the number of free charges depend strongly on the type and amount of impurities in the semiconductor. These
unique properties of semiconductors are put to use in modern electronics, as will be explored in later chapters.
Material Resistivity ( )
Conductors
Silver
Copper
Gold
Aluminum
Tungsten
Iron
Platinum
Steel
Lead
Manganin (Cu, Mn, Ni alloy)
TABLE20.1Resistivities of Various materials at
PAGE: 886
868 20 • Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law
Material Resistivity ( )
Constantan (Cu, Ni alloy)
Mercury
Nichrome (Ni, Fe, Cr alloy)
1
Semiconductors
Carbon (pure)
Carbon
Germanium (pure)
Germanium
Silicon (pure)
Silicon
Insulators
Amber
Glass
Lucite
Mica
Quartz (fused)
Rubber (hard)
Sulfur
Teflon
Wood
TABLE20.1Resistivities of Various materials at
EXAMPLE 20.5
Calculating Resistor Diameter: A Headlight Filament
A car headlight filament is made of tungsten and has a cold resistance of . If the filament is a cylinder 4.00
1 Values depend strongly on amounts and types of impurities
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 887
20.3 • Resistance and Resistivity 869
cm long (it may be coiled to save space), what is its diameter?
Strategy
We can rearrange the equation to find the cross-sectional area of the filament from the given
information. Then its diameter can be found by assuming it has a circular cross-section.
Solution
The cross-sectional area, found by rearranging the expression for the resistance of a cylinder given in , is
20.19
Substituting the given values, and taking fromTable 20.1, yields
× ×
20.20
×
The area of a circle is related to its diameter by
20.21
Solving for the diameter , and substituting the value found for , gives
×
20.22
×
Discussion
The diameter is just under a tenth of a millimeter. It is quoted to only two digits, because is known to only two
digits.
Temperature Variation of Resistance
The resistivity of all materials depends on temperature. Some even become superconductors (zero resistivity) at
very low temperatures. (SeeFigure 20.11.) Conversely, the resistivity of conductors increases with increasing
temperature. Since the atoms vibrate more rapidly and over larger distances at higher temperatures, the electrons
moving through a metal make more collisions, effectively making the resistivity higher. Over relatively small
temperature changes (about or less), resistivity varies with temperature change as expressed in the
following equation
20.23
where is the original resistivity and is thetemperature coefficient of resistivity. (See the values of inTable
20.2below.) For larger temperature changes, may vary or a nonlinear equation may be needed to find . Note that
is positive for metals, meaning their resistivity increases with temperature. Some alloys have been developed
specifically to have a small temperature dependence. Manganin (which is made of copper, manganese and nickel),
for example, has close to zero (to three digits on the scale inTable 20.2), and so its resistivity varies only slightly
with temperature. This is useful for making a temperature-independent resistance standard, for example.
PAGE: 888
870 20 • Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law
FIGURE20.11The resistance of a sample of mercury is zero at very low temperatures—it is a superconductor up to about 4.2 K. Above that
critical temperature, its resistance makes a sudden jump and then increases nearly linearly with temperature.
Material Coefficient (1/°C)2
Conductors
Silver
Copper
Gold
Aluminum
Tungsten
Iron
Platinum
Lead
Manganin (Cu, Mn, Ni alloy)
Constantan (Cu, Ni alloy)
Mercury
Nichrome (Ni, Fe, Cr alloy)
Semiconductors
Carbon (pure)
TABLE20.2Tempature Coefficients of Resistivity
2 Values at 20°C.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 889
20.3 • Resistance and Resistivity 871
Material Coefficient (1/°C)2
Germanium (pure)
Silicon (pure)
TABLE20.2Tempature Coefficients of Resistivity
Note also that is negative for the semiconductors listed inTable 20.2, meaning that their resistivity decreases with
increasing temperature. They become better conductors at higher temperature, because increased thermal
agitation increases the number of free charges available to carry current. This property of decreasing with
temperature is also related to the type and amount of impurities present in the semiconductors.
The resistance of an object also depends on temperature, since is directly proportional to . For a cylinder we
know , and so, if and do not change greatly with temperature, will have the same temperature
dependence as . (Examination of the coefficients of linear expansion shows them to be about two orders of
magnitude less than typical temperature coefficients of resistivity, and so the effect of temperature on and is
about two orders of magnitude less than on .) Thus,
20.24
is the temperature dependence of the resistance of an object, where is the original resistance and is the
resistance after a temperature change . Numerous thermometers are based on the effect of temperature on
resistance. (SeeFigure 20.12.) One of the most common is the thermistor, a semiconductor crystal with a strong
temperature dependence, the resistance of which is measured to obtain its temperature. The device is small, so that
it quickly comes into thermal equilibrium with the part of a person it touches.
FIGURE20.12These familiar thermometers are based on the automated measurement of a thermistor’s temperature-dependent
resistance. (credit: Biol, Wikimedia Commons)
EXAMPLE 20.6
Calculating Resistance: Hot-Filament Resistance
Although caution must be used in applying and for temperature changes
greater than , for tungsten the equations work reasonably well for very large temperature changes. What,
then, is the resistance of the tungsten filament in the previous example if its temperature is increased from room
temperature ( ) to a typical operating temperature of ?
Strategy
This is a straightforward application of , since the original resistance of the filament was given to
be , and the temperature change is .
Solution
The hot resistance is obtained by entering known values into the above equation:
× 20.25
PAGE: 890
872 20 • Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law
Discussion
This value is consistent with the headlight resistance example inOhm’s Law: Resistance and Simple Circuits.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Resistance in a Wire
Learn about the physics of resistance in a wire. Change its resistivity, length, and area to see how they affect the
wire's resistance. The sizes of the symbols in the equation change along with the diagram of a wire.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/20-3-resistance-and-resistivity)
20.4 Electric Power and Energy
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Calculate the power dissipated by a resistor and power supplied by a power supply.
• Calculate the cost of electricity under various circumstances.
Power in Electric Circuits
Power is associated by many people with electricity. Knowing that power is the rate of energy use or energy
conversion, what is the expression forelectric power? Power transmission lines might come to mind. We also think
of lightbulbs in terms of their power ratings in watts. Let us compare a 25-W bulb with a 60-W bulb. (SeeFigure
20.13(a).) Since both operate on the same voltage, the 60-W bulb must draw more current to have a greater power
rating. Thus the 60-W bulb’s resistance must be lower than that of a 25-W bulb. If we increase voltage, we also
increase power. For example, when a 25-W bulb that is designed to operate on 120 V is connected to 240 V, it
briefly glows very brightly and then burns out. Precisely how are voltage, current, and resistance related to electric
power?
FIGURE20.13(a) Which of these lightbulbs, the 25-W bulb (upper left) or the 60-W bulb (upper right), has the higher resistance? Which
draws more current? Which uses the most energy? Can you tell from the color that the 25-W filament is cooler? Is the brighter bulb a
different color and if so why? (credits: Dickbauch, Wikimedia Commons; Greg Westfall, Flickr) (b) This compact fluorescent light (CFL) puts
out the same intensity of light as the 60-W bulb, but at 1/4 to 1/10 the input power. (credit: dbgg1979, Flickr)
Electric energy depends on both the voltage involved and the charge moved. This is expressed most simply as
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 891
20.4 • Electric Power and Energy 873
, where is the charge moved and is the voltage (or more precisely, the potential difference the charge
moves through). Power is the rate at which energy is moved, and so electric power is
20.26
Recognizing that current is (note that here), the expression for power becomes
20.27
Electric power ( ) is simply the product of current times voltage. Power has familiar units of watts. Since the SI unit
for potential energy (PE) is the joule, power has units of joules per second, or watts. Thus, . For
example, cars often have one or more auxiliary power outlets with which you can charge a cell phone or other
electronic devices. These outlets may be rated at 20 A, so that the circuit can deliver a maximum power
. In some applications, electric power may be expressed as volt-amperes or even
kilovolt-amperes ( ).
To see the relationship of power to resistance, we combine Ohm’s law with . Substituting gives
. Similarly, substituting gives . Three expressions for electric power
are listed together here for convenience:
20.28
20.29
20.30
Note that the first equation is always valid, whereas the other two can be used only for resistors. In a simple circuit,
with one voltage source and a single resistor, the power supplied by the voltage source and that dissipated by the
resistor are identical. (In more complicated circuits, can be the power dissipated by a single device and not the
total power in the circuit.)
Different insights can be gained from the three different expressions for electric power. For example,
implies that the lower the resistance connected to a given voltage source, the greater the power delivered.
Furthermore, since voltage is squared in , the effect of applying a higher voltage is perhaps greater than
expected. Thus, when the voltage is doubled to a 25-W bulb, its power nearly quadruples to about 100 W, burning it
out. If the bulb’s resistance remained constant, its power would be exactly 100 W, but at the higher temperature its
resistance is higher, too.
EXAMPLE 20.7
Calculating Power Dissipation and Current: Hot and Cold Power
(a) Consider the examples given inOhm’s Law: Resistance and Simple CircuitsandResistance and Resistivity. Then
find the power dissipated by the car headlight in these examples, both when it is hot and when it is cold. (b) What
current does it draw when cold?
Strategy for (a)
For the hot headlight, we know voltage and current, so we can use to find the power. For the cold headlight,
we know the voltage and resistance, so we can use to find the power.
Solution for (a)
Entering the known values of current and voltage for the hot headlight, we obtain
20.31
The cold resistance was , and so the power it uses when first switched on is
20.32
PAGE: 892
874 20 • Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law
Discussion for (a)
The 30 W dissipated by the hot headlight is typical. But the 411 W when cold is surprisingly higher. The initial power
quickly decreases as the bulb’s temperature increases and its resistance increases.
Strategy and Solution for (b)
The current when the bulb is cold can be found several different ways. We rearrange one of the power equations,
, and enter known values, obtaining
20.33
Discussion for (b)
The cold current is remarkably higher than the steady-state value of 2.50 A, but the current will quickly decline to
that value as the bulb’s temperature increases. Most fuses and circuit breakers (used to limit the current in a circuit)
are designed to tolerate very high currents briefly as a device comes on. In some cases, such as with electric
motors, the current remains high for several seconds, necessitating special “slow blow” fuses.
The Cost of Electricity
The more electric appliances you use and the longer they are left on, the higher your electric bill. This familiar fact is
based on the relationship between energy and power. You pay for the energy used. Since , we see that
20.34
is the energy used by a device using power for a time interval . For example, the more lightbulbs burning, the
greater used; the longer they are on, the greater is. The energy unit on electric bills is the kilowatt-hour ( ),
consistent with the relationship . It is easy to estimate the cost of operating electric appliances if you have
some idea of their power consumption rate in watts or kilowatts, the time they are on in hours, and the cost per
kilowatt-hour for your electric utility. Kilowatt-hours, like all other specialized energy units such as food calories, can
be converted to joules. You can prove to yourself that × .
The electrical energy ( ) used can be reduced either by reducing the time of use or by reducing the power
consumption of that appliance or fixture. This will not only reduce the cost, but it will also result in a reduced impact
on the environment. Improvements to lighting are some of the fastest ways to reduce the electrical energy used in a
home or business. About 20% of a home’s use of energy goes to lighting, while the number for commercial
establishments is closer to 40%. Fluorescent lights are about four times more efficient than incandescent
lights—this is true for both the long tubes and the compact fluorescent lights (CFL). (SeeFigure 20.13(b).) Thus, a
60-W incandescent bulb can be replaced by a 15-W CFL, which has the same brightness and color. CFLs have a bent
tube inside a globe or a spiral-shaped tube, all connected to a standard screw-in base that fits standard
incandescent light sockets. (Original problems with color, flicker, shape, and high initial investment for CFLs have
been addressed in recent years.) The heat transfer from these CFLs is less, and they last up to 10 times longer. The
significance of an investment in such bulbs is addressed in the next example. New white LED lights (which are
clusters of small LED bulbs) are even more efficient (twice that of CFLs) and last 5 times longer than CFLs. However,
their cost is still high.
Making Connections: Energy, Power, and Time
The relationship is one that you will find useful in many different contexts. The energy your body uses in
exercise is related to the power level and duration of your activity, for example. The amount of heating by a
power source is related to the power level and time it is applied. Even the radiation dose of an X-ray image is
related to the power and time of exposure.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 893
20.5 • Alternating Current versus Direct Current 875
EXAMPLE 20.8
Calculating the Cost Effectiveness of Compact Fluorescent Lights (CFL)
If the cost of electricity in your area is 12 cents per kWh, what is the total cost (capital plus operation) of using a
60-W incandescent bulb for 1000 hours (the lifetime of that bulb) if the bulb cost 25 cents? (b) If we replace this
bulb with a compact fluorescent light that provides the same light output, but at one-quarter the wattage, and which
costs $1.50 but lasts 10 times longer (10,000 hours), what will that total cost be?
Strategy
To find the operating cost, we first find the energy used in kilowatt-hours and then multiply by the cost per kilowatt-
hour.
Solution for (a)
The energy used in kilowatt-hours is found by entering the power and time into the expression for energy:
20.35
In kilowatt-hours, this is
20.36
Now the electricity cost is
20.37
The total cost, including the cost of the bulb, will be $7.45 for 1000 hours (about one-half year at 5 hours per day).
Solution for (b)
Since the CFL uses only 15 W and not 60 W, the electricity cost will be $7.20/4 = $1.80. The CFL will last 10 times
longer than the incandescent, so that the investment cost will be 1/10 of the bulb cost for that time period of use, or
0.1($1.50) = $0.15. Therefore, the total cost will be $1.95 for 1000 hours.
Discussion
Therefore, it is much cheaper to use the CFLs, even though the initial investment is higher. The increased cost of
labor that a business must include for replacing the incandescent bulbs more often has not been figured in here.
Making Connections: Take-Home Experiment—Electrical Energy Use Inventory
1) Make a list of the power ratings on a range of appliances in your home or room. Explain why something like a
toaster has a higher rating than a digital clock. Estimate the energy consumed by these appliances in an average
day (by estimating their time of use). Some appliances might only state the operating current. If the household
voltage is 120 V, then use . 2) Check out the total wattage used in the rest rooms of your school’s floor or
building. (You might need to assume the long fluorescent lights in use are rated at 32 W.) Suppose that the
building was closed all weekend and that these lights were left on from 6 p.m. Friday until 8 a.m. Monday. What
would this oversight cost? How about for an entire year of weekends?
20.5 Alternating Current versus Direct Current
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the differences and similarities between AC and DC current.
• Calculate rms voltage, current, and average power.
• Explain why AC current is used for power transmission.
PAGE: 894
876 20 • Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law
Alternating Current
Most of the examples dealt with so far, and particularly those utilizing batteries, have constant voltage sources.
Once the current is established, it is thus also a constant.Direct current(DC) is the flow of electric charge in only
one direction. It is the steady state of a constant-voltage circuit. Most well-known applications, however, use a time-
varying voltage source.Alternating current(AC) is the flow of electric charge that periodically reverses direction. If
the source varies periodically, particularly sinusoidally, the circuit is known as an alternating current circuit.
Examples include the commercial and residential power that serves so many of our needs.Figure 20.14shows
graphs of voltage and current versus time for typical DC and AC power. The AC voltages and frequencies commonly
used in homes and businesses vary around the world.
FIGURE20.14(a) DC voltage and current are constant in time, once the current is established. (b) A graph of voltage and current versus
time for 60-Hz AC power. The voltage and current are sinusoidal and are in phase for a simple resistance circuit. The frequencies and peak
voltages of AC sources differ greatly.
FIGURE20.15The potential difference between the terminals of an AC voltage source fluctuates as shown. The mathematical
expression for is given by .
Figure 20.15shows a schematic of a simple circuit with an AC voltage source. The voltage between the terminals
fluctuates as shown, with theAC voltagegiven by
20.38
where is the voltage at time , is the peak voltage, and is the frequency in hertz. For this simple resistance
circuit, , and so theAC currentis
20.39
where is the current at time , and is the peak current. For this example, the voltage and current are
said to be in phase, as seen inFigure 20.14(b).
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 895
20.5 • Alternating Current versus Direct Current 877
Current in the resistor alternates back and forth just like the driving voltage, since . If the resistor is a
fluorescent light bulb, for example, it brightens and dims 120 times per second as the current repeatedly goes
through zero. A 120-Hz flicker is too rapid for your eyes to detect, but if you wave your hand back and forth between
your face and a fluorescent light, you will see a stroboscopic effect evidencing AC. The fact that the light output
fluctuates means that the power is fluctuating. The power supplied is . Using the expressions for and
above, we see that the time dependence of power is , as shown inFigure 20.16.
Making Connections: Take-Home Experiment—AC/DC Lights
Wave your hand back and forth between your face and a fluorescent light bulb. Do you observe the same thing
with the headlights on your car? Explain what you observe.Warning: Do not look directly at very bright light.
FIGURE20.16AC power as a function of time. Since the voltage and current are in phase here, their product is non-negative and fluctuates
between zero and . Average power is .
We are most often concerned with average power rather than its fluctuations—that 60-W light bulb in your desk
lamp has an average power consumption of 60 W, for example. As illustrated inFigure 20.16, the average power
is
20.40
This is evident from the graph, since the areas above and below the line are equal, but it can also be
proven using trigonometric identities. Similarly, we define an average orrms current and average orrms
voltage to be, respectively,
20.41
and
20.42
where rms stands for root mean square, a particular kind of average. In general, to obtain a root mean square, the
particular quantity is squared, its mean (or average) is found, and the square root is taken. This is useful for AC,
since the average value is zero. Now,
20.43
which gives
20.44
as stated above. It is standard practice to quote , , and rather than the peak values. For example,
most household electricity is 120 V AC, which means that is 120 V. The common 10-A circuit breaker will
interrupt a sustained greater than 10 A. Your 1.0-kW microwave oven consumes , and so on.
You can think of these rms and average values as the equivalent DC values for a simple resistive circuit.
PAGE: 896
878 20 • Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law
To summarize, when dealing with AC, Ohm’s law and the equations for power are completely analogous to those for
DC, but rms and average values are used for AC. Thus, for AC, Ohm’s law is written
20.45
The various expressions for AC power are
20.46
20.47
and
20.48
EXAMPLE 20.9
Peak Voltage and Power for AC
(a) What is the value of the peak voltage for 120-V AC power? (b) What is the peak power consumption rate of a
60.0-W AC light bulb?
Strategy
We are told that is 120 V and is 60.0 W. We can use to find the peak voltage, and we can
manipulate the definition of power to find the peak power from the given average power.
Solution for (a)
Solving the equation for the peak voltage and substituting the known value for gives
20.49
Discussion for (a)
This means that the AC voltage swings from 170 V to and back 60 times every second. An equivalent DC
voltage is a constant 120 V.
Solution for (b)
Peak power is peak current times peak voltage. Thus,
20.50
We know the average power is 60.0 W, and so
20.51
Discussion
So the power swings from zero to 120 W one hundred twenty times per second (twice each cycle), and the power
averages 60 W.
Why Use AC for Power Distribution?
Most large power-distribution systems are AC. Moreover, the power is transmitted at much higher voltages than the
120-V AC (240 V in most parts of the world) we use in homes and on the job. Economies of scale make it cheaper to
build a few very large electric power-generation plants than to build numerous small ones. This necessitates
sending power long distances, and it is obviously important that energy losses en route be minimized. High voltages
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 897
20.5 • Alternating Current versus Direct Current 879
can be transmitted with much smaller power losses than low voltages, as we shall see. (SeeFigure 20.17.) For
safety reasons, the voltage at the user is reduced to familiar values. The crucial factor is that it is much easier to
increase and decrease AC voltages than DC, so AC is used in most large power distribution systems.
FIGURE20.17Power is distributed over large distances at high voltage to reduce power loss in the transmission lines. The voltages
generated at the power plant are stepped up by passive devices called transformers (seeTransformers) to 330,000 volts (or more in some
places worldwide). At the point of use, the transformers reduce the voltage transmitted for safe residential and commercial use. (Credit:
GeorgHH, Wikimedia Commons)
EXAMPLE 20.10
Power Losses Are Less for High-Voltage Transmission
(a) What current is needed to transmit 100 MW of power at 200 kV? (b) What is the power dissipated by the
transmission lines if they have a resistance of ? (c) What percentage of the power is lost in the transmission
lines?
Strategy
We are given , , and the resistance of the lines is . Using these givens,
we can find the current flowing (from ) and then the power dissipated in the lines ( ), and we take
the ratio to the total power transmitted.
Solution
To find the current, we rearrange the relationship and substitute known values. This gives
20.52
Solution
Knowing the current and given the resistance of the lines, the power dissipated in them is found from
. Substituting the known values gives
20.53
Solution
The percent loss is the ratio of this lost power to the total or input power, multiplied by 100:
× 20.54
Discussion
One-fourth of a percent is an acceptable loss. Note that if 100 MW of power had been transmitted at 25 kV, then a
current of 4000 A would have been needed. This would result in a power loss in the lines of 16.0 MW, or 16.0%
rather than 0.250%. The lower the voltage, the more current is needed, and the greater the power loss in the fixed-
resistance transmission lines. Of course, lower-resistance lines can be built, but this requires larger and more
expensive wires. If superconducting lines could be economically produced, there would be no loss in the
PAGE: 898
880 20 • Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law
transmission lines at all. But, as we shall see in a later chapter, there is a limit to current in superconductors, too. In
short, high voltages are more economical for transmitting power, and AC voltage is much easier to raise and lower,
so that AC is used in most large-scale power distribution systems.
It is widely recognized that high voltages pose greater hazards than low voltages. But, in fact, some high voltages,
such as those associated with common static electricity, can be harmless. So it is not voltage alone that determines
a hazard. It is not so widely recognized that AC shocks are often more harmful than similar DC shocks. Thomas
Edison thought that AC shocks were more harmful and set up a DC power-distribution system in New York City in the
late 1800s. There were bitter fights, in particular between Edison and George Westinghouse and Nikola Tesla, who
were advocating the use of AC in early power-distribution systems. AC has prevailed largely due to transformers and
lower power losses with high-voltage transmission.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Generator
Generate electricity with a bar magnet! Discover the physics behind the phenomena by exploring magnets and how
you can use them to make a bulb light.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/l/28gen).
20.6 Electric Hazards and the Human Body
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define thermal hazard, shock hazard, and short circuit.
• Explain what effects various levels of current have on the human body.
There are two known hazards of electricity—thermal and shock. Athermal hazardis one where excessive electric
power causes undesired thermal effects, such as starting a fire in the wall of a house. Ashock hazardoccurs when
electric current passes through a person. Shocks range in severity from painful, but otherwise harmless, to heart-
stopping lethality. This section considers these hazards and the various factors affecting them in a quantitative
manner.Electrical Safety: Systems and Deviceswill consider systems and devices for preventing electrical hazards.
Thermal Hazards
Electric power causes undesired heating effects whenever electric energy is converted to thermal energy at a rate
faster than it can be safely dissipated. A classic example of this is theshort circuit, a low-resistance path between
terminals of a voltage source. An example of a short circuit is shown inFigure 20.18. Insulation on wires leading to
an appliance has worn through, allowing the two wires to come into contact. Such an undesired contact with a high
voltage is called ashort. Since the resistance of the short, , is very small, the power dissipated in the short,
, is very large. For example, if is 120 V and is , then the power is 144 kW,muchgreater than
that used by a typical household appliance. Thermal energy delivered at this rate will very quickly raise the
temperature of surrounding materials, melting or perhaps igniting them.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 899
20.6 • Electric Hazards and the Human Body 881
FIGURE20.18A short circuit is an undesired low-resistance path across a voltage source. (a) Worn insulation on the wires of a toaster
allow them to come into contact with a low resistance . Since , thermal power is created so rapidly that the cord melts or burns.
(b) A schematic of the short circuit.
One particularly insidious aspect of a short circuit is that its resistance may actually be decreased due to the
increase in temperature. This can happen if the short creates ionization. These charged atoms and molecules are
free to move and, thus, lower the resistance . Since , the power dissipated in the short rises, possibly
causing more ionization, more power, and so on. High voltages, such as the 480-V AC used in some industrial
applications, lend themselves to this hazard, because higher voltages create higher initial power production in a
short.
Another serious, but less dramatic, thermal hazard occurs when wires supplying power to a user are overloaded
with too great a current. As discussed in the previous section, the power dissipated in the supply wires is
, where is the resistance of the wires and the current flowing through them. If either or is too
large, the wires overheat. For example, a worn appliance cord (with some of its braided wires broken) may have
rather than the it should be. If 10.0 A of current passes through the cord, then
is dissipated in the cord—much more than is safe. Similarly, if a wire with a
resistance is meant to carry a few amps, but is instead carrying 100 A, it will severely overheat. The power
dissipated in the wire will in that case be . Fuses and circuit breakers are used to limit excessive
currents. (SeeFigure 20.19andFigure 20.20.) Each device opens the circuit automatically when a sustained current
exceeds safe limits.
PAGE: 900
882 20 • Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law
FIGURE20.19(a) A fuse has a metal strip with a low melting point that, when overheated by an excessive current, permanently breaks the
connection of a circuit to a voltage source. (b) A circuit breaker is an automatic but restorable electric switch. The one shown here has a
bimetallic strip that bends to the right and into the notch if overheated. The spring then forces the metal strip downward, breaking the
electrical connection at the points.
FIGURE20.20Schematic of a circuit with a fuse or circuit breaker in it. Fuses and circuit breakers act like automatic switches that open
when sustained current exceeds desired limits.
Fuses and circuit breakers for typical household voltages and currents are relatively simple to produce, but those for
large voltages and currents experience special problems. For example, when a circuit breaker tries to interrupt the
flow of high-voltage electricity, a spark can jump across its points that ionizes the air in the gap and allows the
current to continue flowing. Large circuit breakers found in power-distribution systems employ insulating gas and
even use jets of gas to blow out such sparks. Here AC is safer than DC, since AC current goes through zero 120 times
per second, giving a quick opportunity to extinguish these arcs.
Shock Hazards
Electrical currents through people produce tremendously varied effects. An electrical current can be used to block
back pain. The possibility of using electrical current to stimulate muscle action in paralyzed limbs, perhaps allowing
paraplegics to walk, is under study. TV dramatizations in which electrical shocks are used to bring a heart attack
victim out of ventricular fibrillation (a massively irregular, often fatal, beating of the heart) are more than common.
Yet most electrical shock fatalities occur because a current put the heart into fibrillation. A pacemaker uses
electrical shocks to stimulate the heart to beat properly. Some fatal shocks do not produce burns, but warts can be
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 901
20.6 • Electric Hazards and the Human Body 883
safely burned off with electric current (though freezing using liquid nitrogen is now more common). Of course, there
are consistent explanations for these disparate effects. The major factors upon which the effects of electrical shock
depend are
1. The amount of current
2. The path taken by the current
3. The duration of the shock
4. The frequency of the current ( for DC)
Table 20.3gives the effects of electrical shocks as a function of current for a typical accidental shock. The effects
are for a shock that passes through the trunk of the body, has a duration of 1 s, and is caused by 60-Hz power.
FIGURE20.21An electric current can cause muscular contractions with varying effects. (a) The victim is “thrown” backward by involuntary
muscle contractions that extend the legs and torso. (b) The victim can’t let go of the wire that is stimulating all the muscles in the hand.
Those that close the fingers are stronger than those that open them.
Current
Effect
(mA)
1 Threshold of sensation
5 Maximum harmless current
Onset of sustained muscular contraction; cannot let go for duration of shock; contraction of chest
10–20
muscles may stop breathing during shock
50 Onset of pain
100–300+ Ventricular fibrillation possible; often fatal
300 Onset of burns depending on concentration of current
Onset of sustained ventricular contraction and respiratory paralysis; both cease when shock ends;
6000 (6 A)
heartbeat may return to normal; used to defibrillate the heart
TABLE20.3Effects of Electrical Shock as a Function of Current 3
Our bodies are relatively good conductors due to the water in our bodies. Given that larger currents will flow through
sections with lower resistance (to be further discussed in the next chapter), electric currents preferentially flow
through paths in the human body that have a minimum resistance in a direct path to earth. The earth is a natural
electron sink. Wearing insulating shoes, a requirement in many professions, prohibits a pathway for electrons by
providing a large resistance in that path. Whenever working with high-power tools (drills), or in risky situations,
ensure that you do not provide a pathway for current flow (especially through the heart).
3 For an average male shocked through trunk of body for 1 s by 60-Hz AC. Values for females are 60–80% of those listed.
PAGE: 902
884 20 • Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law
Very small currents pass harmlessly and unfelt through the body. This happens to you regularly without your
knowledge. The threshold of sensation is only 1 mA and, although unpleasant, shocks are apparently harmless for
currents less than 5 mA. A great number of safety rules take the 5-mA value for the maximum allowed shock. At 10
to 20 mA and above, the current can stimulate sustained muscular contractions much as regular nerve impulses do.
People sometimes say they were knocked across the room by a shock, but what really happened was that certain
muscles contracted, propelling them in a manner not of their own choosing. (SeeFigure 20.21(a).) More frightening,
and potentially more dangerous, is the “can’t let go” effect illustrated inFigure 20.21(b). The muscles that close the
fingers are stronger than those that open them, so the hand closes involuntarily on the wire shocking it. This can
prolong the shock indefinitely. It can also be a danger to a person trying to rescue the victim, because the rescuer’s
hand may close about the victim’s wrist. Usually the best way to help the victim is to give the fist a hard knock/blow/
jar with an insulator or to throw an insulator at the fist. Modern electric fences, used in animal enclosures, are now
pulsed on and off to allow people who touch them to get free, rendering them less lethal than in the past.
Greater currents may affect the heart. Its electrical patterns can be disrupted, so that it beats irregularly and
ineffectively in a condition called “ventricular fibrillation.” This condition often lingers after the shock and is fatal
due to a lack of blood circulation. The threshold for ventricular fibrillation is between 100 and 300 mA. At about 300
mA and above, the shock can cause burns, depending on the concentration of current—the more concentrated, the
greater the likelihood of burns.
Very large currents cause the heart and diaphragm to contract for the duration of the shock. Both the heart and
breathing stop. Interestingly, both often return to normal following the shock. The electrical patterns on the heart
are completely erased in a manner that the heart can start afresh with normal beating, as opposed to the permanent
disruption caused by smaller currents that can put the heart into ventricular fibrillation. The latter is something like
scribbling on a blackboard, whereas the former completely erases it. TV dramatizations of electric shock used to
bring a heart attack victim out of ventricular fibrillation also show large paddles. These are used to spread out
current passed through the victim to reduce the likelihood of burns.
Current is the major factor determining shock severity (given that other conditions such as path, duration, and
frequency are fixed, such as in the table and preceding discussion). A larger voltage is more hazardous, but since
, the severity of the shock depends on the combination of voltage and resistance. For example, a person
with dry skin has a resistance of about . If he comes into contact with 120-V AC, a current
passes harmlessly through him. The same person soaking wet may have a
resistance of and the same 120 V will produce a current of 12 mA—above the “can’t let go” threshold and
potentially dangerous.
Most of the body’s resistance is in its dry skin. When wet, salts go into ion form, lowering the resistance significantly.
The interior of the body has a much lower resistance than dry skin because of all the ionic solutions and fluids it
contains. If skin resistance is bypassed, such as by an intravenous infusion, a catheter, or exposed pacemaker leads,
a person is renderedmicroshock sensitive. In this condition, currents about 1/1000 those listed inTable 20.3
produce similar effects. During open-heart surgery, currents as small as can be used to still the heart.
Stringent electrical safety requirements in hospitals, particularly in surgery and intensive care, are related to the
doubly disadvantaged microshock-sensitive patient. The break in the skin has reduced his resistance, and so the
same voltage causes a greater current, and a much smaller current has a greater effect.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 903
20.7 • Nerve Conduction–Electrocardiograms 885
FIGURE20.22Graph of average values for the threshold of sensation and the “can’t let go” current as a function of frequency. The lower
the value, the more sensitive the body is at that frequency.
Factors other than current that affect the severity of a shock are its path, duration, and AC frequency. Path has
obvious consequences. For example, the heart is unaffected by an electric shock through the brain, such as may be
used to treat manic depression. And it is a general truth that the longer the duration of a shock, the greater its
effects.Figure 20.22presents a graph that illustrates the effects of frequency on a shock. The curves show the
minimum current for two different effects, as a function of frequency. The lower the current needed, the more
sensitive the body is at that frequency. Ironically, the body is most sensitive to frequencies near the 50- or 60-Hz
frequencies in common use. The body is slightly less sensitive for DC ( ), mildly confirming Edison’s claims that
AC presents a greater hazard. At higher and higher frequencies, the body becomes progressively less sensitive to
any effects that involve nerves. This is related to the maximum rates at which nerves can fire or be stimulated. At
very high frequencies, electrical current travels only on the surface of a person. Thus a wart can be burned off with
very high frequency current without causing the heart to stop. (Do not try this at home with 60-Hz AC!) Some of the
spectacular demonstrations of electricity, in which high-voltage arcs are passed through the air and over people’s
bodies, employ high frequencies and low currents. (SeeFigure 20.23.) Electrical safety devices and techniques are
discussed in detail inElectrical Safety: Systems and Devices.
FIGURE20.23Is this electric arc dangerous? The answer depends on the AC frequency and the power involved. (credit: Khimich Alex,
Wikimedia Commons)
20.7 Nerve Conduction–Electrocardiograms
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the process by which electric signals are transmitted along a neuron.
• Explain the effects myelin sheaths have on signal propagation.
• Explain what the features of an ECG signal indicate.
Nerve Conduction
Electric currents in the vastly complex system of billions of nerves in our body allow us to sense the world, control
parts of our body, and think. These are representative of the three major functions of nerves. First, nerves carry
messages from our sensory organs and others to the central nervous system, consisting of the brain and spinal cord.
Second, nerves carry messages from the central nervous system to muscles and other organs. Third, nerves
PAGE: 904
886 20 • Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law
transmit and process signals within the central nervous system. The sheer number of nerve cells and the incredibly
greater number of connections between them makes this system the subtle wonder that it is.Nerve conductionis a
general term for electrical signals carried by nerve cells. It is one aspect ofbioelectricity, or electrical effects in and
created by biological systems.
Nerve cells, properly calledneurons, look different from other cells—they have tendrils, some of them many
centimeters long, connecting them with other cells. (SeeFigure 20.24.) Signals arrive at the cell body across
synapsesor throughdendrites, stimulating the neuron to generate its own signal, sent along its longaxonto other
nerve or muscle cells. Signals may arrive from many other locations and be transmitted to yet others, conditioning
the synapses by use, giving the system its complexity and its ability to learn.
FIGURE20.24A neuron with its dendrites and long axon. Signals in the form of electric currents reach the cell body through dendrites and
across synapses, stimulating the neuron to generate its own signal sent down the axon. The number of interconnections can be far greater
than shown here.
The method by which these electric currents are generated and transmitted is more complex than the simple
movement of free charges in a conductor, but it can be understood with principles already discussed in this text. The
most important of these are the Coulomb force and diffusion.
Figure 20.25illustrates how a voltage (potential difference) is created across the cell membrane of a neuron in its
resting state. This thin membrane separates electrically neutral fluids having differing concentrations of ions, the
most important varieties being , , and (these are sodium, potassium, and chlorine ions with single plus
or minus charges as indicated). As discussed inMolecular Transport Phenomena: Diffusion, Osmosis, and Related
Processes, free ions will diffuse from a region of high concentration to one of low concentration. But the cell
membrane issemipermeable, meaning that some ions may cross it while others cannot. In its resting state, the cell
membrane is permeable to and , and impermeable to . Diffusion of and thus creates the layers
of positive and negative charge on the outside and inside of the membrane. The Coulomb force prevents the ions
from diffusing across in their entirety. Once the charge layer has built up, the repulsion of like charges prevents more
from moving across, and the attraction of unlike charges prevents more from leaving either side. The result is two
layers of charge right on the membrane, with diffusion being balanced by the Coulomb force. A tiny fraction of the
charges move across and the fluids remain neutral (other ions are present), while a separation of charge and a
voltage have been created across the membrane.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 905
20.7 • Nerve Conduction–Electrocardiograms 887
FIGURE20.25The semipermeable membrane of a cell has different concentrations of ions inside and out. Diffusion moves the and
ions in the direction shown, until the Coulomb force halts further transfer. This results in a layer of positive charge on the outside, a
layer of negative charge on the inside, and thus a voltage across the cell membrane. The membrane is normally impermeable to .
FIGURE20.26An action potential is the pulse of voltage inside a nerve cell graphed here. It is caused by movements of ions across the cell
membrane as shown. Depolarization occurs when a stimulus makes the membrane permeable to ions. Repolarization follows as the
membrane again becomes impermeable to and moves from high to low concentration. In the long term, active transport slowly
maintains the concentration differences, but the cell may fire hundreds of times in rapid succession without seriously depleting them.
The separation of charge creates a potential difference of 70 to 90 mV across the cell membrane. While this is a
small voltage, the resulting electric field ( ) across the only 8-nm-thick membrane is immense (on the order
of 11 MV/m!) and has fundamental effects on its structure and permeability. Now, if the exterior of a neuron is taken
to be at 0 V, then the interior has aresting potentialof about –90 mV. Such voltages are created across the
membranes of almost all types of animal cells but are largest in nerve and muscle cells. In fact, fully 25% of the
energy used by cells goes toward creating and maintaining these potentials.
Electric currents along the cell membrane are created by any stimulus that changes the membrane’s permeability.
The membrane thus temporarily becomes permeable to , which then rushes in, driven both by diffusion and the
Coulomb force. This inrush of first neutralizes the inside membrane, ordepolarizesit, and then makes it slightly
positive. The depolarization causes the membrane to again become impermeable to , and the movement of
quickly returns the cell to its resting potential, orrepolarizesit. This sequence of events results in a voltage pulse,
PAGE: 906
888 20 • Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law
called theaction potential. (SeeFigure 20.26.) Only small fractions of the ions move, so that the cell can fire many
hundreds of times without depleting the excess concentrations of and . Eventually, the cell must replenish
these ions to maintain the concentration differences that create bioelectricity. This sodium-potassium pump is an
example ofactive transport, wherein cell energy is used to move ions across membranes against diffusion gradients
and the Coulomb force.
The action potential is a voltage pulse at one location on a cell membrane. How does it get transmitted along the cell
membrane, and in particular down an axon, as a nerve impulse? The answer is that the changing voltage and electric
fields affect the permeability of the adjacent cell membrane, so that the same process takes place there. The
adjacent membrane depolarizes, affecting the membrane further down, and so on, as illustrated inFigure 20.27.
Thus the action potential stimulated at one location triggers anerve impulsethat moves slowly (about 1 m/s) along
the cell membrane.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 907
20.7 • Nerve Conduction–Electrocardiograms 889
FIGURE20.27A nerve impulse is the propagation of an action potential along a cell membrane. A stimulus causes an action potential at
one location, which changes the permeability of the adjacent membrane, causing an action potential there. This in turn affects the
membrane further down, so that the action potential moves slowly (in electrical terms) along the cell membrane. Although the impulse is
due to and going across the membrane, it is equivalent to a wave of charge moving along the outside and inside of the membrane.
Some axons, like that inFigure 20.24, are sheathed withmyelin, consisting of fat-containing cells.Figure 20.28
shows an enlarged view of an axon having myelin sheaths characteristically separated by unmyelinated gaps (called
nodes of Ranvier). This arrangement gives the axon a number of interesting properties. Since myelin is an insulator,
it prevents signals from jumping between adjacent nerves (cross talk). Additionally, the myelinated regions transmit
electrical signals at a very high speed, as an ordinary conductor or resistor would. There is no action potential in the
myelinated regions, so that no cell energy is used in them. There is an signal loss in the myelin, but the signal is
regenerated in the gaps, where the voltage pulse triggers the action potential at full voltage. So a myelinated axon
transmits a nerve impulse faster, with less energy consumption, and is better protected from cross talk than an
unmyelinated one. Not all axons are myelinated, so that cross talk and slow signal transmission are a characteristic
PAGE: 908
890 20 • Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law
of the normal operation of these axons, another variable in the nervous system.
The degeneration or destruction of the myelin sheaths that surround the nerve fibers impairs signal transmission
and can lead to numerous neurological effects. One of the most prominent of these diseases comes from the body’s
own immune system attacking the myelin in the central nervous system—multiple sclerosis. MS symptoms include
fatigue, vision problems, weakness of arms and legs, loss of balance, and tingling or numbness in one’s extremities
(neuropathy). It is more apt to strike younger adults, especially females. Causes might come from infection,
environmental or geographic affects, or genetics. At the moment there is no known cure for MS.
Most animal cells can fire or create their own action potential. Muscle cells contract when they fire and are often
induced to do so by a nerve impulse. In fact, nerve and muscle cells are physiologically similar, and there are even
hybrid cells, such as in the heart, that have characteristics of both nerves and muscles. Some animals, like the
infamous electric eel (seeFigure 20.29), use muscles ganged so that their voltages add in order to create a shock
great enough to stun prey.
FIGURE20.28Propagation of a nerve impulse down a myelinated axon, from left to right. The signal travels very fast and without energy
input in the myelinated regions, but it loses voltage. It is regenerated in the gaps. The signal moves faster than in unmyelinated axons and is
insulated from signals in other nerves, limiting cross talk.
FIGURE20.29An electric eel flexes its muscles to create a voltage that stuns prey. (credit: chrisbb, Flickr)
Electrocardiograms
Just as nerve impulses are transmitted by depolarization and repolarization of adjacent membrane, the
depolarization that causes muscle contraction can also stimulate adjacent muscle cells to depolarize (fire) and
contract. Thus, a depolarization wave can be sent across the heart, coordinating its rhythmic contractions and
enabling it to perform its vital function of propelling blood through the circulatory system.Figure 20.30is a
simplified graphic of a depolarization wave spreading across the heart from thesinoarterial (SA) node,the heart’s
natural pacemaker.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 909
20.7 • Nerve Conduction–Electrocardiograms 891
FIGURE20.30The outer surface of the heart changes from positive to negative during depolarization. This wave of depolarization is
spreading from the top of the heart and is represented by a vector pointing in the direction of the wave. This vector is a voltage (potential
difference) vector. Three electrodes, labeled RA, LA, and LL, are placed on the patient. Each pair (called leads I, II, and III) measures a
component of the depolarization vector and is graphed in an ECG.
Anelectrocardiogram (ECG)is a record of the voltages created by the wave of depolarization and subsequent
repolarization in the heart. (They are also abbreviated EKG.) Voltages between pairs of electrodes placed on the
chest are vector components of the voltage wave on the heart. Standard ECGs have 12 or more electrodes, but only
three are shown inFigure 20.30for clarity. Decades ago, three-electrode ECGs were performed by placing
electrodes on the left and right arms and the left leg. The voltage between the right arm and the left leg is called the
lead II potentialand is the most often graphed. We shall examine the lead II potential as an indicator of heart-
muscle function and see that it is coordinated with arterial blood pressure as well.
Heart function and its four-chamber action are explored inViscosity and Laminar Flow; Poiseuille’s Law. Basically,
the right and left atria receive blood from the body and lungs, respectively, and pump the blood into the ventricles.
The right and left ventricles, in turn, pump blood through the lungs and the rest of the body, respectively.
Depolarization of the heart muscle causes it to contract. After contraction it is repolarized to ready it for the next
beat. The ECG measures components of depolarization and repolarization of the heart muscle and can yield
significant information on the functioning and malfunctioning of the heart.
Figure 20.31shows an ECG of the lead II potential and a graph of the corresponding arterial blood pressure. The
major features are labeled P, Q, R, S, and T. TheP waveis generated by the depolarization and contraction of the
atria as they pump blood into the ventricles. TheQRS complexis created by the depolarization of the ventricles as
they pump blood to the lungs and body. Since the shape of the heart and the path of the depolarization wave are not
simple, the QRS complex has this typical shape and time span. The lead II QRS signal also masks the repolarization
of the atria, which occur at the same time. Finally, theT waveis generated by the repolarization of the ventricles and
is followed by the next P wave in the next heartbeat. Arterial blood pressure varies with each part of the heartbeat,
with systolic (maximum) pressure occurring closely after the QRS complex, which signals contraction of the
ventricles.
FIGURE20.31A lead II ECG with corresponding arterial blood pressure. The QRS complex is created by the depolarization and contraction
of the ventricles and is followed shortly by the maximum or systolic blood pressure. See text for further description.
PAGE: 910
892 20 • Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm's Law
Taken together, the 12 leads of a state-of-the-art ECG can yield a wealth of information about the heart. For
example, regions of damaged heart tissue, called infarcts, reflect electrical waves and are apparent in one or more
lead potentials. Subtle changes due to slight or gradual damage to the heart are most readily detected by comparing
a recent ECG to an older one. This is particularly the case since individual heart shape, size, and orientation can
cause variations in ECGs from one individual to another. ECG technology has advanced to the point where a portable
ECG monitor can be incorporated into wearable devices and other small objects. SeeFigure 20.32.
FIGURE20.32In a 12-lead ECG, six electrodes are placed on the chest, and four electrodes are placed on the limbs.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Neuron
Stimulate a neuron and monitor what happens. Pause, rewind, and move forward in time in order to observe the ions
as they move across the neuron membrane.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/20-7-nerve-
conductionelectrocardiograms)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 911
20 • Glossary 893
Glossary
AC current current that fluctuates sinusoidally with currentIis proportional to the potential difference
time, expressed asI = I sin 2πft, whereIis the V,∝ V; it is often written asI = V/R, whereRis the
0
current at timet, I is the peak current, andfis the resistance
0
frequency in hertz ohmic a type of a material for which Ohm's law is
AC voltage voltage that fluctuates sinusoidally with valid
time, expressed asV = V sin 2πft, whereVis the resistance the electric property that impedes
0
voltage at timet, V is the peak voltage, andfis the current; for ohmic materials, it is the ratio of voltage
0
frequency in hertz to current,R = V/I
alternating current (AC) the flow of electric charge resistivity an intrinsic property of a material,
that periodically reverses direction independent of its shape or size, directly
ampere (amp) the SI unit for current; 1 A = 1 C/s proportional to the resistance, denoted byρ
bioelectricity electrical effects in and created by rms current the root mean square of the current,
biological systems , whereI is the peak current, in an
0
direct current (DC) the flow of electric charge in only AC system
one direction rms voltage the root mean square of the voltage,
drift velocity the average velocity at which free
, whereV is the peak voltage, in an
0
charges flow in response to an electric field
AC system
electric current the rate at which charge flows,I=
semipermeable property of a membrane that allows
ΔQ/Δt
only certain types of ions to cross it
electric power the rate at which electrical energy is
shock hazard when electric current passes through a
supplied by a source or dissipated by a device; it is
person
the product of current times voltage
short circuit also known as a “short,” a low-
electrocardiogram (ECG) usually abbreviated ECG, a
resistance path between terminals of a voltage
record of voltages created by depolarization and
source
repolarization, especially in the heart
simple circuit a circuit with a single voltage source
microshock sensitive a condition in which a person’s
and a single resistor
skin resistance is bypassed, possibly by a medical
temperature coefficient of resistivity an empirical
procedure, rendering the person vulnerable to
quantity, denoted byα, which describes the change
electrical shock at currents about 1/1000 the
in resistance or resistivity of a material with
normally required level
temperature
nerve conduction the transport of electrical signals
thermal hazard a hazard in which electric current
by nerve cells
causes undesired thermal effects
ohm the unit of resistance, given by 1Ω = 1 V/A
Ohm’s law an empirical relation stating that the
Section Summary
20.1Current • Current is proportional to drift velocity , as
expressed in the relationship . Here,
• Electric current is the rate at which charge flows,
is the current through a wire of cross-sectional
given by
area . The wire’s material has a free-charge
density , and each carrier has charge and a drift
velocity .
where is the amount of charge passing
• Electrical signals travel at speeds about
through an area in time .
times greater than the drift velocity of free
• The direction of conventional current is taken as
electrons.
the direction in which positive charge moves.
• The SI unit for current is the ampere (A), where 20.2Ohm’s Law: Resistance and Simple
Circuits
• Current is the flow of free charges, such as
electrons and ions. • A simple circuitisone in which there is a single
• Drift velocity is the average speed at which voltage source and a single resistance.
these charges move. • One statement of Ohm’s law gives the relationship
PAGE: 912
894 20 • Conceptual Questions
between current , voltage , and resistance in only one direction. It refers to systems where the
a simple circuit to be source voltage is constant.
• Resistance has units of ohms ( ), related to volts • The voltage source of an alternating current (AC)
and amperes by . system puts out , where is the
• There is a voltage or drop across a resistor, voltage at time , is the peak voltage, and is
caused by the current flowing through it, given by the frequency in hertz.
. • In a simple circuit, and AC current is
, where is the current at time ,
20.3Resistance and Resistivity
and is the peak current.
• The resistance of a cylinder of length and • The average AC power is .
cross-sectional area is , where is the • Average (rms) current and average (rms)
resistivity of the material. voltage are and ,
• Values of inTable 20.1show that materials fall
where rms stands for root mean square.
into three groups—conductors, semiconductors,
• Thus, .
and insulators.
• Ohm’s law for AC is .
• Temperature affects resistivity; for relatively small
• Expressions for the average power of an AC circuit
temperature changes , resistivity is
, where is the original are , , and
resistivity and is the temperature coefficient of
, analogous to the expressions for
resistivity.
DC circuits.
• Table 20.2gives values for , the temperature
coefficient of resistivity. 20.6Electric Hazards and the Human Body
• The resistance of an object also varies with
• The two types of electric hazards are thermal
temperature: , where is the
(excessive power) and shock (current through a
original resistance, and is the resistance after
person).
the temperature change.
• Shock severity is determined by current, path,
20.4Electric Power and Energy duration, and AC frequency.
• Table 20.3lists shock hazards as a function of
• Electric power is the rate (in watts) that energy
current.
is supplied by a source or dissipated by a device.
• Figure 20.22graphs the threshold current for two
• Three expressions for electrical power are
hazards as a function of frequency.
20.7Nerve Conduction–Electrocardiograms
• Electric potentials in neurons and other cells are
and
created by ionic concentration differences across
semipermeable membranes.
• The energy used by a device with a power over a • Stimuli change the permeability and create action
time is . potentials that propagate along neurons.
• Myelin sheaths speed this process and reduce the
20.5Alternating Current versus Direct
needed energy input.
Current
• This process in the heart can be measured with an
electrocardiogram (ECG).
• Direct current (DC) is the flow of electric current in
Conceptual Questions
20.1Current 2. Car batteries are rated in ampere-hours ( ). To
what physical quantity do ampere-hours
1. Can a wire carry a current and still be neutral—that
correspond (voltage, charge, . . .), and what
is, have a total charge of zero? Explain.
relationship do ampere-hours have to energy
content?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 913
20 • Conceptual Questions 895
3. If two different wires having identical cross- 12. Explain why for the
sectional areas carry the same current, will the drift temperature variation of the resistance of an
velocity be higher or lower in the better conductor? object is not as accurate as ,
Explain in terms of the equation , by which gives the temperature variation of resistivity
.
considering how the density of charge carriers
relates to whether or not a material is a good
20.4Electric Power and Energy
conductor.
4. Why are two conducting paths from a voltage
13. Why do incandescent lightbulbs grow dim late in
source to an electrical device needed to operate the
their lives, particularly just before their filaments
device?
break?
5. In cars, one battery terminal is connected to the
14. The power dissipated in a resistor is given by
metal body. How does this allow a single wire to
, which means power decreases if
supply current to electrical devices rather than two
resistance increases. Yet this power is also given
wires?
by , which means power increases if
6. Why isn’t a bird sitting on a high-voltage power line
resistance increases. Explain why there is no
electrocuted? Contrast this with the situation in
contradiction here.
which a large bird hits two wires simultaneously
with its wings.
20.5Alternating Current versus Direct
Current
20.2Ohm’s Law: Resistance and Simple
Circuits 15. Give an example of a use of AC power other than
in the household. Similarly, give an example of a
7. The drop across a resistor means that there is a
use of DC power other than that supplied by
change in potential or voltage across the resistor. Is
batteries.
there any change in current as it passes through a
16. Why do voltage, current, and power go through
resistor? Explain.
zero 120 times per second for 60-Hz AC
8. How is the drop in a resistor similar to the
electricity?
pressure drop in a fluid flowing through a pipe?
17. You are riding in a train, gazing into the distance
through its window. As close objects streak by,
20.3Resistance and Resistivity
you notice that the nearby fluorescent lights make
9. In which of the three semiconducting materials dashedstreaks. Explain.
listed inTable 20.1do impurities supply free
20.6Electric Hazards and the Human Body
charges? (Hint: Examine the range of resistivity for
each and determine whether the pure
18. Using an ohmmeter, a student measures the
semiconductor has the higher or lower
resistance between various points on his body.
conductivity.)
They find that the resistance between two points
10. Does the resistance of an object depend on the path
on the same finger is about the same as the
current takes through it? Consider, for example, a
resistance between two points on opposite
rectangular bar—is its resistance the same along its
hands—both are several hundred thousand ohms.
length as across its width? (SeeFigure 20.33.)
Furthermore, the resistance decreases when more
skin is brought into contact with the probes of the
ohmmeter. Finally, there is a dramatic drop in
resistance (to a few thousand ohms) when the
skin is wet. Explain these observations and their
implications regarding skin and internal resistance
of the human body.
19. What are the two major hazards of electricity?
FIGURE20.33Does current taking two different paths through the20. Why isn’t a short circuit a shock hazard?
same object encounter different resistance? 21. What determines the severity of a shock? Can you
say that a certain voltage is hazardous without
11. If aluminum and copper wires of the same length
further information?
have the same resistance, which has the larger
diameter? Why?
PAGE: 914
896 20 • Problems & Exercises
22. An electrified needle is used to burn off warts, 27. Why is the resistance of wet skin so much smaller
with the circuit being completed by having the than dry, and why do blood and other bodily fluids
patient sit on a large butt plate. Why is this plate have low resistances?
large? 28. Could a person on intravenous infusion (an IV) be
23. Some surgery is performed with high-voltage microshock sensitive?
electricity passing from a metal scalpel through 29. In view of the small currents that cause shock
the tissue being cut. Considering the nature of hazards and the larger currents that circuit
electric fields at the surface of conductors, why breakers and fuses interrupt, how do they play a
would you expect most of the current to flow from role in preventing shock hazards?
the sharp edge of the scalpel? Do you think high-
or low-frequency AC is used? 20.7Nerve Conduction–Electrocardiograms
24. Some devices often used in bathrooms, such as
30. Note that inFigure 20.25, both the concentration
hairdryers, often have safety messages saying “Do
gradient and the Coulomb force tend to move
not use when the bathtub or basin is full of water.”
ions into the cell. What prevents this?
Why is this so?
31. Define depolarization, repolarization, and the
25. We are often advised to not flick electric switches
action potential.
with wet hands, dry your hand first. We are also
32. Explain the properties of myelinated nerves in
advised to never throw water on an electric fire.
terms of the insulating properties of myelin.
Why is this so?
26. Before working on a power transmission line,
experts will touch the line with the back of the
hand as a final check that the voltage is zero. Why
the back of the hand?
Problems & Exercises
20.1Current
1. What is the current in milliamperes produced by the
solar cells of a pocket calculator through which
4.00 C of charge passes in 4.00 h?
2. A total of 600 C of charge passes through a
flashlight in 0.500 h. What is the average current?
3. What is the current when a typical static charge of
moves from your finger to a metal
doorknob in ?
4. Find the current when 2.00 nC jumps between your
comb and hair over a time interval.
5. A large lightning bolt had a 20,000-A current and
moved 30.0 C of charge. What was its duration?
6. The 200-A current through a spark plug moves
0.300 mC of charge. How long does the spark last?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 915
20 • Problems & Exercises 897
7. (a) A defibrillator sends a 6.00-A current through 13. A large cyclotron directs a beam of nuclei
the chest of a patient by applying a 10,000-V onto a target with a beam current of 0.250 mA. (a)
potential as in the figure below. What is the How many nuclei per second is this? (b)
resistance of the path? (b) The defibrillator paddles How long does it take for 1.00 C to strike the
make contact with the patient through a conducting target? (c) How long before 1.00 mol of
gel that greatly reduces the path resistance. nuclei strike the target?
Discuss the difficulties that would ensue if a larger 14. Repeat the above example onExample 20.3, but
voltage were used to produce the same current for a wire made of silver and given there is one
through the patient, but with the path having free electron per silver atom.
perhaps 50 times the resistance. (Hint: The current 15. Using the results of the above example on
must be about the same, so a higher voltage would Example 20.3, find the drift velocity in a copper
imply greater power. Use this equation for power: wire of twice the diameter and carrying 20.0 A.
.) 16. A 14-gauge copper wire has a diameter of 1.628
mm. What magnitude current flows when the drift
velocity is 1.00 mm/s? (See above example on
Example 20.3for useful information.)
17. SPEAR, a storage ring about 72.0 m in diameter at
the Stanford Linear Accelerator (closed in 2009),
has a 20.0-A circulating beam of electrons that are
moving at nearly the speed of light. (SeeFigure
20.35.) How many electrons are in the beam?
FIGURE20.34The capacitor in a defibrillation unit drives a
current through the heart of a patient.
FIGURE20.35Electrons circulating in the storage ring called
8. During open-heart surgery, a defibrillator can be SPEAR constitute a 20.0-A current. Because they travel
close to the speed of light, each electron completes many
used to bring a patient out of cardiac arrest. The
orbits in each second.
resistance of the path is and a 10.0-mA
current is needed. What voltage should be applied?
20.2Ohm’s Law: Resistance and Simple
9. (a) A defibrillator passes 12.0 A of current through
Circuits
the torso of a person for 0.0100 s. How much
charge moves? (b) How many electrons pass
18. What current flows through the bulb of a 3.00-V
through the wires connected to the patient? (See
flashlight when its hot resistance is ?
figure two problems earlier.)
19. Calculate the effective resistance of a pocket
10. A clock battery wears out after moving 10,000 C
calculator that has a 1.35-V battery and through
of charge through the clock at a rate of 0.500 mA.
which 0.200 mA flows.
(a) How long did the clock run? (b) How many
20. What is the effective resistance of a car’s starter
electrons per second flowed?
motor when 150 A flows through it as the car
11. The batteries of a submerged non-nuclear
battery applies 11.0 V to the motor?
submarine supply 1000 A at full speed ahead.
21. How many volts are supplied to operate an
How long does it take to move Avogadro’s number
indicator light on a DVD player that has a
( × ) of electrons at this rate? resistance of , given that 25.0 mA passes
12. Electron guns are used in X-ray tubes. The through it?
electrons are accelerated through a relatively
large voltage and directed onto a metal target,
producing X-rays. (a) How many electrons per
second strike the target if the current is 0.500
mA? (b) What charge strikes the target in 0.750 s?
PAGE: 916
898 20 • Problems & Exercises
22. (a) Find the voltage drop in an extension cord 34. Assuming a constant temperature coefficient of
having a resistance and through which resistivity, what is the maximum percent decrease
5.00 A is flowing. (b) A cheaper cord utilizes in the resistance of a constantan wire starting at
thinner wire and has a resistance of . ?
What is the voltage drop in it when 5.00 A flows? 35. A wire is drawn through a die, stretching it to four
(c) Why is the voltage to whatever appliance is times its original length. By what factor does its
being used reduced by this amount? What is the resistance increase?
effect on the appliance? 36. A copper wire has a resistance of at
23. A power transmission line is hung from metal , and an iron wire has a resistance of
towers with glass insulators having a resistance of at the same temperature. At what
× What current flows through the temperature are their resistances equal?
37. (a) Digital medical thermometers determine
insulator if the voltage is 200 kV? (Some high-
temperature by measuring the resistance of a
voltage lines are DC.)
semiconductor device called a thermistor (which
has ) when it is at the same
20.3Resistance and Resistivity
temperature as the patient. What is a patient’s
24. What is the resistance of a 20.0-m-long piece of temperature if the thermistor’s resistance at that
12-gauge copper wire having a 2.053-mm temperature is 82.0% of its value at
diameter? (normal body temperature)? (b) The negative
25. The diameter of 0-gauge copper wire is 8.252 value for may not be maintained for very low
mm. Find the resistance of a 1.00-km length of temperatures. Discuss why and whether this is the
such wire used for power transmission. case here. (Hint: Resistance can’t become
26. If the 0.010-mm diameter tungsten filament in a negative.)
light bulb is to have a resistance of at 38. Integrated Concepts
, how long should it be? (a) RedoExercise 9.25taking into account the
27. Find the ratio of the diameter of aluminum to thermal expansion of the tungsten filament. You
copper wire, if they have the same resistance per may assume a thermal expansion coefficient of
unit length (as they might in household wiring). × . (b) By what percentage does your
28. What current flows through a 2.54-cm-diameter
answer differ from that in the example?
rod of pure silicon that is 20.0 cm long, when
39. Unreasonable Results
is applied to it? (Such a rod may be
(a) To what temperature must you raise a resistor
used to make nuclear-particle detectors, for
made of constantan to double its resistance,
example.)
assuming a constant temperature coefficient of
29. (a) To what temperature must you raise a copper
resistivity? (b) To cut it in half? (c) What is
wire, originally at , to double its resistance,
unreasonable about these results? (d) Which
neglecting any changes in dimensions? (b) Does
assumptions are unreasonable, or which premises
this happen in household wiring under ordinary
are inconsistent?
circumstances?
30. A resistor made of Nichrome wire is used in an
20.4Electric Power and Energy
application where its resistance cannot change
more than 1.00% from its value at . Over 40. What is the power of a lightning
what temperature range can it be used? bolt having a current of ?
31. Of what material is a resistor made if its resistance 41. What power is supplied to the starter motor of a
is 40.0% greater at than at ? large truck that draws 250 A of current from a
32. An electronic device designed to operate at any 24.0-V battery hookup?
temperature in the range from 42. A charge of 4.00 C of charge passes through a
contains pure carbon resistors. By what factor pocket calculator’s solar cells in 4.00 h. What is
does their resistance increase over this range? the power output, given the calculator’s voltage
33. (a) Of what material is a wire made, if it is 25.0 m output is 3.00 V? (SeeFigure 20.36.)
long with a 0.100 mm diameter and has a
resistance of at ? (b) What is its
resistance at ?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 917
20 • Problems & Exercises 899
51. With a 1200-W toaster, how much electrical
energy is needed to make a slice of toast (cooking
time = 1 minute)? At , how much
does this cost?
52. What would be the maximum cost of a CFL such
that the total cost (investment plus operating)
would be the same for both CFL and incandescent
60-W bulbs? Assume the cost of the incandescent
bulb is 25 cents and that electricity costs
. Calculate the cost for 1000 hours,
as in the cost effectiveness of CFL example.
53. Some makes of older cars have 6.00-V electrical
FIGURE20.36The strip of solar cells just above the keys of this systems. (a) What is the hot resistance of a
calculator convert light to electricity to supply its energy needs.
(credit: Evan-Amos, Wikimedia Commons) 30.0-W headlight in such a car? (b) What current
flows through it?
43. How many watts does a flashlight that has
54. Alkaline batteries have the advantage of putting
pass through it in 0.500 h use if its
out constant voltage until very nearly the end of
voltage is 3.00 V?
their life. How long will an alkaline battery rated at
44. Find the power dissipated in each of these
and 1.58 V keep a 1.00-W flashlight
extension cords: (a) an extension cord having a
bulb burning?
resistance and through which 5.00 A is
55. A cauterizer, used to stop bleeding in surgery, puts
flowing; (b) a cheaper cord utilizing thinner wire
out 2.00 mA at 15.0 kV. (a) What is its power
and with a resistance of
output? (b) What is the resistance of the path?
45. Verify that the units of a volt-ampere are watts, as
56. The average television is said to be on 6 hours per
implied by the equation .
day. Estimate the yearly cost of electricity to
46. Show that the units , as implied by
operate 100 million TVs, assuming their power
the equation .
consumption averages 150 W and the cost of
47. Show that the units , as implied
electricity averages .
by the equation .
57. An old lightbulb draws only 50.0 W, rather than its
48. Verify the energy unit equivalence that
original 60.0 W, due to evaporative thinning of its
× . filament. By what factor is its diameter reduced,
49. Electrons in an X-ray tube are accelerated through assuming uniform thinning along its length?
and directed toward a target to Neglect any effects caused by temperature
produce X-rays. Calculate the power of the differences.
electron beam in this tube if it has a current of 58. 00-gauge copper wire has a diameter of 9.266
15.0 mA. mm. Calculate the power loss in a kilometer of
50. An electric water heater consumes 5.00 kW for such wire when it carries .
2.00 h per day. What is the cost of running it for
one year if electricity costs ?
SeeFigure 20.37.
FIGURE20.37On-demand electric hot water heater. Heat is
supplied to water only when needed. (credit: aviddavid,
Flickr)
PAGE: 918
900 20 • Problems & Exercises
59. Integrated Concepts 63. Integrated Concepts
Cold vaporizers pass a current through water, Hydroelectric generators (seeFigure 20.39) at
evaporating it with only a small increase in Hoover Dam produce a maximum current of
temperature. One such home device is rated at at 250 kV. (a) What is the power
3.50 A and utilizes 120 V AC with 95.0% output? (b) The water that powers the generators
efficiency. (a) What is the vaporization rate in enters and leaves the system at low speed (thus
grams per minute? (b) How much water must you its kinetic energy does not change) but loses 160
put into the vaporizer for 8.00 h of overnight m in altitude. How many cubic meters per second
operation? (SeeFigure 20.38.) are needed, assuming 85.0% efficiency?
FIGURE20.39Hydroelectric generators at the Hoover dam.
(credit: Jon Sullivan)
64. Integrated Concepts
FIGURE20.38This cold vaporizer passes current directly (a) Assuming 95.0% efficiency for the conversion
through water, vaporizing it directly with relatively little of electrical power by the motor, what current
temperature increase.
must the 12.0-V batteries of a 750-kg electric car
60. Integrated Concepts be able to supply: (a) To accelerate from rest to
(a) What energy is dissipated by a lightning bolt 25.0 m/s in 1.00 min? (b) To climb a
having a 20,000-A current, a voltage of -high hill in 2.00 min at a constant
, and a length of 1.00 ms? (b) 25.0-m/s speed while exerting of
What mass of tree sap could be raised from force to overcome air resistance and friction? (c)
to its boiling point and then evaporated by To travel at a constant 25.0-m/s speed, exerting a
this energy, assuming sap has the same thermal force to overcome air resistance and
characteristics as water? friction? SeeFigure 20.40.
61. Integrated Concepts
What current must be produced by a 12.0-V
battery-operated bottle warmer in order to heat
75.0 g of glass, 250 g of baby formula, and
of aluminum from to
in 5.00 min?
62. Integrated Concepts
How much time is needed for a surgical cauterizer
to raise the temperature of 1.00 g of tissue from
to and then boil away 0.500 g of
water, if it puts out 2.00 mA at 15.0 kV? Ignore
heat transfer to the surroundings. FIGURE20.40This REVAi, an electric car, gets recharged on
a street in London. (credit: Frank Hebbert)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 919
20 • Problems & Exercises 901
65. Integrated Concepts 71. Construct Your Own Problem
A light-rail commuter train draws 630 A of 650-V Consider an electric immersion heater used to
DC electricity when accelerating. (a) What is its heat a cup of water to make tea. Construct a
power consumption rate in kilowatts? (b) How problem in which you calculate the needed
long does it take to reach 20.0 m/s starting from resistance of the heater so that it increases the
rest if its loaded mass is × , assuming temperature of the water and cup in a reasonable
amount of time. Also calculate the cost of the
95.0% efficiency and constant power? (c) Find its
electrical energy used in your process. Among the
average acceleration. (d) Discuss how the
things to be considered are the voltage used, the
acceleration you found for the light-rail train
masses and heat capacities involved, heat losses,
compares to what might be typical for an
and the time over which the heating takes place.
automobile.
Your instructor may wish for you to consider a
66. Integrated Concepts
thermal safety switch (perhaps bimetallic) that
(a) An aluminum power transmission line has a
will halt the process before damaging
resistance of . What is its mass per
temperatures are reached in the immersion unit.
kilometer? (b) What is the mass per kilometer of a
copper line having the same resistance? A lower
20.5Alternating Current versus Direct
resistance would shorten the heating time.
Current
Discuss the practical limits to speeding the
heating by lowering the resistance.
72. (a) What is the hot resistance of a 25-W light bulb
67. Integrated Concepts
that runs on 120-V AC? (b) If the bulb’s operating
(a) An immersion heater utilizing 120 V can raise
temperature is , what is its resistance at
the temperature of a aluminum cup ?
containing 350 g of water from to 73. Certain heavy industrial equipment uses AC power
in 2.00 min. Find its resistance, assuming it is that has a peak voltage of 679 V. What is the rms
constant during the process. (b) A lower voltage?
resistance would shorten the heating time. 74. A certain circuit breaker trips when the rms
Discuss the practical limits to speeding the current is 15.0 A. What is the corresponding peak
heating by lowering the resistance. current?
68. Integrated Concepts 75. Military aircraft use 400-Hz AC power, because it
(a) What is the cost of heating a hot tub containing is possible to design lighter-weight equipment at
1500 kg of water from to , this higher frequency. What is the time for one
assuming 75.0% efficiency to account for heat complete cycle of this power?
transfer to the surroundings? The cost of 76. A North American tourist takes his 25.0-W, 120-V
electricity is . (b) What current was AC razor to Europe, finds a special adapter, and
used by the 220-V AC electric heater, if this took plugs it into 240 V AC. Assuming constant
4.00 h? resistance, what power does the razor consume as
69. Unreasonable Results it is ruined?
(a) What current is needed to transmit 77. In this problem, you will verify statements made
of power at 480 V? (b) What at the end of the power losses forExample 20.10.
power is dissipated by the transmission lines if (a) What current is needed to transmit 100 MW of
they have a resistance? (c) What is power at a voltage of 25.0 kV? (b) Find the power
unreasonable about this result? (d) Which loss in a transmission line. (c) What
assumptions are unreasonable, or which premises percent loss does this represent?
are inconsistent? 78. A small office-building air conditioner operates on
70. Unreasonable Results 408-V AC and consumes 50.0 kW. (a) What is its
(a) What current is needed to transmit effective resistance? (b) What is the cost of
of power at 10.0 kV? (b) Find the running the air conditioner during a hot summer
resistance of 1.00 km of wire that would cause a month when it is on 8.00 h per day for 30 days and
0.0100% power loss. (c) What is the diameter of a electricity costs ?
1.00-km-long copper wire having this resistance? 79. What is the peak power consumption of a 120-V
(d) What is unreasonable about these results? (e) AC microwave oven that draws 10.0 A?
Which assumptions are unreasonable, or which 80. What is the peak current through a 500-W room
premises are inconsistent? heater that operates on 120-V AC power?
PAGE: 920
902 20 • Problems & Exercises
81. Two different electrical devices have the same 91. (a) What is the resistance of a 220-V AC short
power consumption, but one is meant to be circuit that generates a peak power of 96.8 kW?
operated on 120-V AC and the other on 240-V AC. (b) What would the average power be if the
(a) What is the ratio of their resistances? (b) What voltage was 120 V AC?
is the ratio of their currents? (c) Assuming its 92. A heart defibrillator passes 10.0 A through a
resistance is unaffected, by what factor will the patient’s torso for 5.00 ms in an attempt to restore
power increase if a 120-V AC device is connected normal beating. (a) How much charge passed? (b)
to 240-V AC? What voltage was applied if 500 J of energy was
82. Nichrome wire is used in some radiative heaters. dissipated? (c) What was the path’s resistance? (d)
(a) Find the resistance needed if the average Find the temperature increase caused in the 8.00
power output is to be 1.00 kW utilizing 120-V AC. kg of affected tissue.
(b) What length of Nichrome wire, having a cross- 93. Integrated Concepts
sectional area of , is needed if the A short circuit in a 120-V appliance cord has a
operating temperature is ? (c) What power resistance. Calculate the temperature
will it draw when first switched on? rise of the 2.00 g of surrounding materials,
83. Find the time after when the instantaneous assuming their specific heat capacity is
voltage of 60-Hz AC first reaches the following and that it takes 0.0500 s for a
values: (a) (b) (c) 0. circuit breaker to interrupt the current. Is this
84. (a) At what two times in the first period following likely to be damaging?
does the instantaneous voltage in 60-Hz AC 94. Construct Your Own Problem
equal ? (b) ? Consider a person working in an environment
where electric currents might pass through their
20.6Electric Hazards and the Human Body body. Construct a problem in which you calculate
the resistance of insulation needed to protect the
85. (a) How much power is dissipated in a short circuit
person from harm. Among the things to be
of 220-V AC through a resistance of ? (b)
considered are the voltage to which the person
What current flows?
might be exposed, likely body resistance (dry, wet,
86. What voltage is involved in a 1.44-kW short circuit
…), and acceptable currents (safe but sensed, safe
through a resistance?
and unfelt, …).
87. Find the current through a person and identify the
likely effect on her if she touches a 120-V AC
20.7Nerve Conduction–Electrocardiograms
source: (a) if she is standing on a rubber mat and
offers a total resistance of ; (b) if she is 95. Integrated Concepts
standing barefoot on wet grass and has a Use the ECG inFigure 20.31to determine the
resistance of only . heart rate in beats per minute assuming a
88. While taking a bath, a person touches the metal constant time between beats.
case of a radio. The path through the person to the 96. Integrated Concepts
drainpipe and ground has a resistance of . (a) Referring toFigure 20.31, find the time systolic
What is the smallest voltage on the case of the pressure lags behind the middle of the QRS
radio that could cause ventricular fibrillation? complex. (b) Discuss the reasons for the time lag.
89. Foolishly trying to fish a burning piece of bread 97. Critical ThinkingA copper wire of length 1.25 m is
from a toaster with a metal butter knife, a man in a circuit. A current of 2.50 A flows through the
comes into contact with 120-V AC. He does not wire. (a) Initially, the circuit is at . If there is
even feel it since, luckily, he is wearing rubber- an energy loss of 3.25 MJ in the first second
soled shoes. What is the minimum resistance of caused by the wire as soon as the circuit is turned
the path the current follows through the person? on, what is the radius of the wire? (b) After the
90. (a) During surgery, a current as small as wire heats , how much energy is being
applied directly to the heart may cause ventricular dissipated by the circuit per second? Neglect the
fibrillation. If the resistance of the exposed heart effects of thermal expansion since the wire is
is , what is the smallest voltage that poses considered to be physically constrained from
this danger? (b) Does your answer imply that expanding. Assume the current is maintained. (c)
special electrical safety precautions are needed? At what temperature will the energy dissipation be
1.00% higher than it was at the beginning of the
experiment?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 921
CHAPTER 21
Circuits and DC Instruments
FIGURE21.1Electric circuits in computers and servers allow large amounts of data to be quickly and accurately analyzed. (credit:
WOCinTech Chat/Flickr)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
21.1Resistors in Series and Parallel
21.2Electromotive Force: Terminal Voltage
21.3Kirchhoff’s Rules
21.4DC Voltmeters and Ammeters
21.5Null Measurements
21.6DC Circuits Containing Resistors and Capacitors
INTRODUCTION TO CIRCUITS AND DC INSTRUMENTS Electric circuits are commonplace. Some are simple, such
as those in flashlights. Others, such as those used in supercomputers, are extremely complex.
This collection of modules takes the topic of electric circuits a step beyond simple circuits. When the circuit is purely
resistive, everything in this module applies to both DC and AC. Matters become more complex when capacitance is
involved. We do consider what happens when capacitors are connected to DC voltage sources, but the interaction of
capacitors and other nonresistive devices with AC is left for a later chapter. Finally, a number of important DC
instruments, such as meters that measure voltage and current, are covered in this chapter.
PAGE: 922
904 21 • Circuits and DC Instruments
21.1 Resistors in Series and Parallel
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Draw a circuit with resistors in parallel and in series.
• Calculate the voltage drop of a current across a resistor using Ohm’s law.
• Contrast the way total resistance is calculated for resistors in series and in parallel.
• Explain why total resistance of a parallel circuit is less than the smallest resistance of any of the resistors
in that circuit.
• Calculate total resistance of a circuit that contains a mixture of resistors connected in series and in
parallel.
Most circuits have more than one component, called aresistorthat limits the flow of charge in the circuit. A
measure of this limit on charge flow is calledresistance. The simplest combinations of resistors are the series and
parallel connections illustrated inFigure 21.2. The total resistance of a combination of resistors depends on both
their individual values and how they are connected.
FIGURE21.2(a) A series connection of resistors. (b) A parallel connection of resistors.
Resistors in Series
When are resistors inseries? Resistors are in series whenever the flow of charge, called thecurrent, must flow
through devices sequentially. For example, if current flows through a person holding a screwdriver and into the
Earth, then inFigure 21.2(a) could be the resistance of the screwdriver’s shaft, the resistance of its handle,
the person’s body resistance, and the resistance of her shoes.
Figure 21.3shows resistors in series connected to avoltagesource. It seems reasonable that the total resistance is
the sum of the individual resistances, considering that the current has to pass through each resistor in sequence.
(This fact would be an advantage to a person wishing to avoid an electrical shock, who could reduce the current by
wearing high-resistance rubber-soled shoes. It could be a disadvantage if one of the resistances were a faulty high-
resistance cord to an appliance that would reduce the operating current.)
FIGURE21.3Three resistors connected in series to a battery (left) and the equivalent single or series resistance (right).
To verify that resistances in series do indeed add, let us consider the loss of electrical power, called avoltage drop,
in each resistor inFigure 21.3.
According toOhm’s law, the voltage drop, , across a resistor when a current flows through it is calculated using
the equation , where equals the current in amps (A) and is the resistance in ohms . Another way to
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 923
21.1 • Resistors in Series and Parallel 905
think of this is that is the voltage necessary to make a current flow through a resistance .
So the voltage drop across is , that across is , and that across is . The sum
of these voltages equals the voltage output of the source; that is,
21.1
This equation is based on the conservation of energy and conservation of charge. Electrical potential energy can be
described by the equation , where is the electric charge and is the voltage. Thus the energy supplied by
the source is , while that dissipated by the resistors is
21.2
Connections: Conservation Laws
The derivations of the expressions for series and parallel resistance are based on the laws of conservation of
energy and conservation of charge, which state that total charge and total energy are constant in any process.
These two laws are directly involved in all electrical phenomena and will be invoked repeatedly to explain both
specific effects and the general behavior of electricity.
These energies must be equal, because there is no other source and no other destination for energy in the circuit.
Thus, . The charge cancels, yielding , as stated. (Note that the same
amount of charge passes through the battery and each resistor in a given amount of time, since there is no
capacitance to store charge, there is no place for charge to leak, and charge is conserved.)
Now substituting the values for the individual voltages gives
21.3
Note that for the equivalent single series resistance , we have
21.4
This implies that the total or equivalent series resistance of three resistors is .
This logic is valid in general for any number of resistors in series; thus, the total resistance of a series connection
is
21.5
as proposed. Since all of the current must pass through each resistor, it experiences the resistance of each, and
resistances in series simply add up.
EXAMPLE 21.1
Calculating Resistance, Current, Voltage Drop, and Power Dissipation: Analysis of a Series
Circuit
Suppose the voltage output of the battery inFigure 21.3is , and the resistances are ,
, and . (a) What is the total resistance? (b) Find the current. (c) Calculate the voltage drop
in each resistor, and show these add to equal the voltage output of the source. (d) Calculate the power dissipated by
each resistor. (e) Find the power output of the source, and show that it equals the total power dissipated by the
resistors.
Strategy and Solution for (a)
The total resistance is simply the sum of the individual resistances, as given by this equation:
21.6
PAGE: 924
906 21 • Circuits and DC Instruments
Strategy and Solution for (b)
The current is found using Ohm’s law, . Entering the value of the applied voltage and the total resistance
yields the current for the circuit:
21.7
Strategy and Solution for (c)
The voltage—or drop—in a resistor is given by Ohm’s law. Entering the current and the value of the first
resistance yields
21.8
Similarly,
21.9
and
21.10
Discussion for (c)
The three drops add to , as predicted:
21.11
Strategy and Solution for (d)
The easiest way to calculate power in watts (W) dissipated by a resistor in a DC circuit is to useJoule’s law, ,
where is electric power. In this case, each resistor has the same full current flowing through it. By substituting
Ohm’s law into Joule’s law, we get the power dissipated by the first resistor as
21.12
Similarly,
21.13
and
21.14
Discussion for (d)
Power can also be calculated using either or , where is the voltage drop across the resistor (not
the full voltage of the source). The same values will be obtained.
Strategy and Solution for (e)
The easiest way to calculate power output of the source is to use , where is the source voltage. This gives
21.15
Discussion for (e)
Note, coincidentally, that the total power dissipated by the resistors is also 7.20 W, the same as the power put out
by the source. That is,
21.16
Power is energy per unit time (watts), and so conservation of energy requires the power output of the source to be
equal to the total power dissipated by the resistors.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 925
21.1 • Resistors in Series and Parallel 907
Major Features of Resistors in Series
1. Series resistances add:
2. The same current flows through each resistor in series.
3. Individual resistors in series do not get the total source voltage, but divide it.
Resistors in Parallel
Figure 21.4shows resistors inparallel, wired to a voltage source. Resistors are in parallel when each resistor is
connected directly to the voltage source by connecting wires having negligible resistance. Each resistor thus has the
full voltage of the source applied to it.
Each resistor draws the same current it would if it alone were connected to the voltage source (provided the voltage
source is not overloaded). For example, an automobile’s headlights, radio, and so on, are wired in parallel, so that
they utilize the full voltage of the source and can operate completely independently. The same is true in your house,
or any building. (SeeFigure 21.4(b).)
FIGURE21.4(a) Three resistors connected in parallel to a battery and the equivalent single or parallel resistance. (b) Electrical power
setup in a house. (credit: Dmitry G, Wikimedia Commons)
To find an expression for the equivalent parallel resistance , let us consider the currents that flow and how they
are related to resistance. Since each resistor in the circuit has the full voltage, the currents flowing through the
individual resistors are , , and . Conservation of charge implies that the total current
produced by the source is the sum of these currents:
PAGE: 926
908 21 • Circuits and DC Instruments
21.17
Substituting the expressions for the individual currents gives
21.18
Note that Ohm’s law for the equivalent single resistance gives
21.19
The terms inside the parentheses in the last two equations must be equal. Generalizing to any number of resistors,
the total resistance of a parallel connection is related to the individual resistances by
21.20
This relationship results in a total resistance that is less than the smallest of the individual resistances. (This is
seen in the next example.) When resistors are connected in parallel, more current flows from the source than would
flow for any of them individually, and so the total resistance is lower.
EXAMPLE 21.2
Calculating Resistance, Current, Power Dissipation, and Power Output: Analysis of a Parallel
Circuit
Let the voltage output of the battery and resistances in the parallel connection inFigure 21.4be the same as the
previously considered series connection: , , , and . (a) What is
the total resistance? (b) Find the total current. (c) Calculate the currents in each resistor, and show these add to
equal the total current output of the source. (d) Calculate the power dissipated by each resistor. (e) Find the power
output of the source, and show that it equals the total power dissipated by the resistors.
Strategy and Solution for (a)
The total resistance for a parallel combination of resistors is found using the equation below. Entering known values
gives
21.21
Thus,
21.22
(Note that in these calculations, each intermediate answer is shown with an extra digit.)
We must invert this to find the total resistance . This yields
21.23
The total resistance with the correct number of significant digits is
Discussion for (a)
is, as predicted, less than the smallest individual resistance.
Strategy and Solution for (b)
The total current can be found from Ohm’s law, substituting for the total resistance. This gives
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 927
21.1 • Resistors in Series and Parallel 909
21.24
Discussion for (b)
Current for each device is much larger than for the same devices connected in series (see the previous example). A
circuit with parallel connections has a smaller total resistance than the resistors connected in series.
Strategy and Solution for (c)
The individual currents are easily calculated from Ohm’s law, since each resistor gets the full voltage. Thus,
21.25
Similarly,
21.26
and
21.27
Discussion for (c)
The total current is the sum of the individual currents:
21.28
This is consistent with conservation of charge.
Strategy and Solution for (d)
The power dissipated by each resistor can be found using any of the equations relating power to current, voltage,
and resistance, since all three are known. Let us use , since each resistor gets full voltage. Thus,
21.29
Similarly,
21.30
and
21.31
Discussion for (d)
The power dissipated by each resistor is considerably higher in parallel than when connected in series to the same
voltage source.
Strategy and Solution for (e)
The total power can also be calculated in several ways. Choosing , and entering the total current, yields
21.32
Discussion for (e)
Total power dissipated by the resistors is also 179 W:
PAGE: 928
910 21 • Circuits and DC Instruments
21.33
This is consistent with the law of conservation of energy.
Overall Discussion
Note that both the currents and powers in parallel connections are greater than for the same devices in series.
Major Features of Resistors in Parallel
1. Parallel resistance is found from , and it is smaller than any individual
resistance in the combination.
2. Each resistor in parallel has the same full voltage of the source applied to it. (Power distribution systems
most often use parallel connections to supply the myriad devices served with the same voltage and to allow
them to operate independently.)
3. Parallel resistors do not each get the total current; they divide it.
Combinations of Series and Parallel
More complex connections of resistors are sometimes just combinations of series and parallel. These are commonly
encountered, especially when wire resistance is considered. In that case, wire resistance is in series with other
resistances that are in parallel.
Combinations of series and parallel can be reduced to a single equivalent resistance using the technique illustrated
inFigure 21.5. Various parts are identified as either series or parallel, reduced to their equivalents, and further
reduced until a single resistance is left. The process is more time consuming than difficult.
FIGURE21.5This combination of seven resistors has both series and parallel parts. Each is identified and reduced to an equivalent
resistance, and these are further reduced until a single equivalent resistance is reached.
The simplest combination of series and parallel resistance, shown inFigure 21.6, is also the most instructive, since
it is found in many applications. For example, could be the resistance of wires from a car battery to its electrical
devices, which are in parallel. and could be the starter motor and a passenger compartment light. We have
previously assumed that wire resistance is negligible, but, when it is not, it has important effects, as the next
example indicates.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 929
21.1 • Resistors in Series and Parallel 911
EXAMPLE 21.3
Calculating Resistance, Drop, Current, and Power Dissipation: Combining Series and
Parallel Circuits
Figure 21.6shows the resistors from the previous two examples wired in a different way—a combination of series
and parallel. We can consider to be the resistance of wires leading to and . (a) Find the total resistance.
(b) What is the drop in ? (c) Find the current through . (d) What power is dissipated by ?
FIGURE21.6These three resistors are connected to a voltage source so that and are in parallel with one another and that
combination is in series with .
Strategy and Solution for (a)
To find the total resistance, we note that and are in parallel and their combination is in series with .
Thus the total (equivalent) resistance of this combination is
21.34
First, we find using the equation for resistors in parallel and entering known values:
21.35
Inverting gives
21.36
So the total resistance is
21.37
Discussion for (a)
The total resistance of this combination is intermediate between the pure series and pure parallel values (
and , respectively) found for the same resistors in the two previous examples.
Strategy and Solution for (b)
To find the drop in , we note that the full current flows through . Thus its drop is
21.38
We must find before we can calculate . The total current is found using Ohm’s law for the circuit. That is,
21.39
Entering this into the expression above, we get
21.40
PAGE: 930
912 21 • Circuits and DC Instruments
Discussion for (b)
The voltage applied to and is less than the total voltage by an amount . When wire resistance is large, it
can significantly affect the operation of the devices represented by and .
Strategy and Solution for (c)
To find the current through , we must first find the voltage applied to it. We call this voltage , because it is
applied to a parallel combination of resistors. The voltage applied to both and is reduced by the amount ,
and so it is
21.41
Now the current through resistance is found using Ohm’s law:
21.42
Discussion for (c)
The current is less than the 2.00 A that flowed through when it was connected in parallel to the battery in the
previous parallel circuit example.
Strategy and Solution for (d)
The power dissipated by is given by
21.43
Discussion for (d)
The power is less than the 24.0 W this resistor dissipated when connected in parallel to the 12.0-V source.
Practical Implications
One implication of this last example is that resistance in wires reduces the current and power delivered to a resistor.
If wire resistance is relatively large, as in a worn (or a very long) extension cord, then this loss can be significant. If a
large current is drawn, the drop in the wires can also be significant.
For example, when you are rummaging in the refrigerator and the motor comes on, the refrigerator light dims
momentarily. Similarly, you can see the passenger compartment light dim when you start the engine of your car
(although this may be due to resistance inside the battery itself).
What is happening in these high-current situations is illustrated inFigure 21.7. The device represented by has a
very low resistance, and so when it is switched on, a large current flows. This increased current causes a larger
drop in the wires represented by , reducing the voltage across the light bulb (which is ), which then dims
noticeably.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 931
21.2 • Electromotive Force: Terminal Voltage 913
FIGURE21.7Why do lights dim when a large appliance is switched on? The answer is that the large current the appliance motor draws
causes a significant drop in the wires and reduces the voltage across the light.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Can any arbitrary combination of resistors be broken down into series and parallel combinations? See if you can
draw a circuit diagram of resistors that cannot be broken down into combinations of series and parallel.
Solution
No, there are many ways to connect resistors that are not combinations of series and parallel, including loops and
junctions. In such cases Kirchhoff’s rules, to be introduced inKirchhoff’s Rules, will allow you to analyze the circuit.
Problem-Solving Strategies for Series and Parallel Resistors
1. Draw a clear circuit diagram, labeling all resistors and voltage sources. This step includes a list of the
knowns for the problem, since they are labeled in your circuit diagram.
2. Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem (identify the unknowns). A written list is
useful.
3. Determine whether resistors are in series, parallel, or a combination of both series and parallel. Examine
the circuit diagram to make this assessment. Resistors are in series if the same current must pass
sequentially through them.
4. Use the appropriate list of major features for series or parallel connections to solve for the unknowns. There
is one list for series and another for parallel. If your problem has a combination of series and parallel,
reduce it in steps by considering individual groups of series or parallel connections, as done in this module
and the examples. Special note: When finding , the reciprocal must be taken with care.
5. Check to see whether the answers are reasonable and consistent. Units and numerical results must be
reasonable. Total series resistance should be greater, whereas total parallel resistance should be smaller,
for example. Power should be greater for the same devices in parallel compared with series, and so on.
21.2 Electromotive Force: Terminal Voltage
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Compare and contrast the voltage and the electromagnetic force of an electric power source.
• Describe what happens to the terminal voltage, current, and power delivered to a load as internal
resistance of the voltage source increases (due to aging of batteries, for example).
• Explain why it is beneficial to use more than one voltage source connected in parallel.
When you forget to turn off your car lights, they slowly dim as the battery runs down. Why don’t they simply blink off
when the battery’s energy is gone? Their gradual dimming implies that battery output voltage decreases as the
battery is depleted.
PAGE: 932
914 21 • Circuits and DC Instruments
Furthermore, if you connect an excessive number of 12-V lights in parallel to a car battery, they will be dim even
when the battery is fresh and even if the wires to the lights have very low resistance. This implies that the battery’s
output voltage is reduced by the overload.
The reason for the decrease in output voltage for depleted or overloaded batteries is that all voltage sources have
two fundamental parts—a source of electrical energy and aninternal resistance. Let us examine both.
Electromotive Force
You can think of many different types of voltage sources. Batteries themselves come in many varieties. There are
many types of mechanical/electrical generators, driven by many different energy sources, ranging from nuclear to
wind. Solar cells create voltages directly from light, while thermoelectric devices create voltage from temperature
differences.
A few voltage sources are shown inFigure 21.8. All such devices create apotential differenceand can supply
current if connected to a resistance. On the small scale, the potential difference creates an electric field that exerts
force on charges, causing current. We thus use the nameelectromotive force, abbreviated emf.
Emf is not a force at all; it is a special type of potential difference. To be precise, the electromotive force (emf) is the
potential difference of a source when no current is flowing. Units of emf are volts.
FIGURE21.8A variety of voltage sources (clockwise from top left): the Brazos Wind Farm in Fluvanna, Texas (credit: Leaflet, Wikimedia
Commons); the Krasnoyarsk Dam in Russia (credit: Alex Polezhaev); a solar farm (credit: U.S. Department of Energy); and a group of nickel
metal hydride batteries (credit: Tiaa Monto). The voltage output of each depends on its construction and load, and equals emf only if there
is no load.
Electromotive force is directly related to the source of potential difference, such as the particular combination of
chemicals in a battery. However, emf differs from the voltage output of the device when current flows. The voltage
across the terminals of a battery, for example, is less than the emf when the battery supplies current, and it declines
further as the battery is depleted or loaded down. However, if the device’s output voltage can be measured without
drawing current, then output voltage will equal emf (even for a very depleted battery).
Internal Resistance
As noted before, a 12-V truck battery is physically larger, contains more charge and energy, and can deliver a larger
current than a 12-V motorcycle battery. Both are lead-acid batteries with identical emf, but, because of its size, the
truck battery has a smaller internal resistance . Internal resistance is the inherent resistance to the flow of current
within the source itself.
Figure 21.9is a schematic representation of the two fundamental parts of any voltage source. The emf (represented
by a script E in the figure) and internal resistance are in series. The smaller the internal resistance for a given emf,
the more current and the more power the source can supply.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 933
21.2 • Electromotive Force: Terminal Voltage 915
FIGURE21.9Any voltage source (in this case, a carbon-zinc dry cell) has an emf related to its source of potential difference, and an internal
resistance related to its construction. (Note that the script E stands for emf.). Also shown are the output terminals across which the
terminal voltage is measured. Since , terminal voltage equals emf only if there is no current flowing.
The internal resistance can behave in complex ways. As noted, increases as a battery is depleted. But internal
resistance may also depend on the magnitude and direction of the current through a voltage source, its
temperature, and even its history. The internal resistance of rechargeable nickel-cadmium cells, for example,
depends on how many times and how deeply they have been depleted.
Things Great and Small: The Submicroscopic Origin of Battery Potential
Various types of batteries are available, with emfs determined by the combination of chemicals involved. We can
view this as a molecular reaction (what much of chemistry is about) that separates charge.
The lead-acid battery used in cars and other vehicles is one of the most common types. A single cell (one of six)
of this battery is seen inFigure 21.10. The cathode (positive) terminal of the cell is connected to a lead oxide
plate, while the anode (negative) terminal is connected to a lead plate. Both plates are immersed in sulfuric acid,
the electrolyte for the system.
FIGURE21.10Artist’s conception of a lead-acid cell. Chemical reactions in a lead-acid cell separate charge, sending negative charge
to the anode, which is connected to the lead plates. The lead oxide plates are connected to the positive or cathode terminal of the cell.
Sulfuric acid conducts the charge as well as participating in the chemical reaction.
The details of the chemical reaction are left to the reader to pursue in a chemistry text, but their results at the
molecular level help explain the potential created by the battery.Figure 21.11shows the result of a single
chemical reaction. Two electrons are placed on the anode, making it negative, provided that the cathode
supplied two electrons. This leaves the cathode positively charged, because it has lost two electrons. In short, a
separation of charge has been driven by a chemical reaction.
Note that the reaction will not take place unless there is a complete circuit to allow two electrons to be supplied
to the cathode. Under many circumstances, these electrons come from the anode, flow through a resistance,
and return to the cathode. Note also that since the chemical reactions involve substances with resistance, it is
not possible to create the emf without an internal resistance.
PAGE: 934
916 21 • Circuits and DC Instruments
FIGURE21.11Artist’s conception of two electrons being forced onto the anode of a cell and two electrons being removed from the
cathode of the cell. The chemical reaction in a lead-acid battery places two electrons on the anode and removes two from the cathode.
It requires a closed circuit to proceed, since the two electrons must be supplied to the cathode.
Why are the chemicals able to produce a unique potential difference? Quantum mechanical descriptions of
molecules, which take into account the types of atoms and numbers of electrons in them, are able to predict the
energy states they can have and the energies of reactions between them.
In the case of a lead-acid battery, an energy of 2 eV is given to each electron sent to the anode. Voltage is defined as
the electrical potential energy divided by charge: . An electron volt is the energy given to a single electron
by a voltage of 1 V. So the voltage here is 2 V, since 2 eV is given to each electron. It is the energy produced in each
molecular reaction that produces the voltage. A different reaction produces a different energy and, hence, a
different voltage.
Terminal Voltage
The voltage output of a device is measured across its terminals and, thus, is called itsterminal voltage . Terminal
voltage is given by
21.44
where is the internal resistance and is the current flowing at the time of the measurement.
is positive if current flows away from the positive terminal, as shown inFigure 21.9. You can see that the larger the
current, the smaller the terminal voltage. And it is likewise true that the larger the internal resistance, the smaller
the terminal voltage.
Suppose a load resistance is connected to a voltage source, as inFigure 21.12. Since the resistances are in
series, the total resistance in the circuit is . Thus the current is given by Ohm’s law to be
21.45
FIGURE21.12Schematic of a voltage source and its load . Since the internal resistance is in series with the load, it can significantly
affect the terminal voltage and current delivered to the load. (Note that the script E stands for emf.)
We see from this expression that the smaller the internal resistance , the greater the current the voltage source
supplies to its load . As batteries are depleted, increases. If becomes a significant fraction of the load
resistance, then the current is significantly reduced, as the following example illustrates.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 935
21.2 • Electromotive Force: Terminal Voltage 917
EXAMPLE 21.4
Calculating Terminal Voltage, Power Dissipation, Current, and Resistance: Terminal Voltage
and Load
A certain battery has a 12.0-V emf and an internal resistance of . (a) Calculate its terminal voltage when
connected to a load. (b) What is the terminal voltage when connected to a load? (c) What power
does the load dissipate? (d) If the internal resistance grows to , find the current, terminal voltage,
and power dissipated by a load.
Strategy
The analysis above gave an expression for current when internal resistance is taken into account. Once the current is
found, the terminal voltage can be calculated using the equation . Once current is found, the power
dissipated by a resistor can also be found.
Solution for (a)
Entering the given values for the emf, load resistance, and internal resistance into the expression above yields
21.46
Enter the known values into the equation to get the terminal voltage:
21.47
Discussion for (a)
The terminal voltage here is only slightly lower than the emf, implying that is a light load for this particular
battery.
Solution for (b)
Similarly, with , the current is
21.48
The terminal voltage is now
21.49
Discussion for (b)
This terminal voltage exhibits a more significant reduction compared with emf, implying is a heavy load for
this battery.
Solution for (c)
The power dissipated by the load can be found using the formula . Entering the known values
gives
21.50
Discussion for (c)
Note that this power can also be obtained using the expressions or , where is the terminal voltage (10.0 V
in this case).
PAGE: 936
918 21 • Circuits and DC Instruments
Solution for (d)
Here the internal resistance has increased, perhaps due to the depletion of the battery, to the point where it is as
great as the load resistance. As before, we first find the current by entering the known values into the expression,
yielding
21.51
Now the terminal voltage is
21.52
and the power dissipated by the load is
21.53
Discussion for (d)
We see that the increased internal resistance has significantly decreased terminal voltage, current, and power
delivered to a load.
Battery testers, such as those inFigure 21.13, use small load resistors to intentionally draw current to determine
whether the terminal voltage drops below an acceptable level. They really test the internal resistance of the battery.
If internal resistance is high, the battery is weak, as evidenced by its low terminal voltage.
FIGURE21.13These two battery testers measure terminal voltage under a load to determine the condition of a battery. The large device is
being used by a U.S. Navy electronics technician to test large batteries aboard the aircraft carrier USSNimitzand has a small resistance that
can dissipate large amounts of power. (credit: U.S. Navy photo by Photographer’s Mate Airman Jason A. Johnston) The small device is used
on small batteries and has a digital display to indicate the acceptability of their terminal voltage. (credit: Keith Williamson)
Some batteries can be recharged by passing a current through them in the direction opposite to the current they
supply to a resistance. This is done routinely in cars and batteries for small electrical appliances and electronic
devices, and is represented pictorially inFigure 21.14. The voltage output of the battery charger must be greater
than the emf of the battery to reverse current through it. This will cause the terminal voltage of the battery to be
greater than the emf, since , and is now negative.
FIGURE21.14A car battery charger reverses the normal direction of current through a battery, reversing its chemical reaction and
replenishing its chemical potential.
Multiple Voltage Sources
There are two voltage sources when a battery charger is used. Voltage sources connected in series are relatively
simple. When voltage sources are in series, their internal resistances add and their emfs add algebraically. (See
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 937
21.2 • Electromotive Force: Terminal Voltage 919
Figure 21.15.) Series connections of voltage sources are common—for example, in flashlights, toys, and other
appliances. Usually, the cells are in series in order to produce a larger total emf.
But if the cells oppose one another, such as when one is put into an appliance backward, the total emf is less, since
it is the algebraic sum of the individual emfs.
A battery is a multiple connection of voltaic cells, as shown inFigure 21.16. The disadvantage of series connections
of cells is that their internal resistances add. One of the authors once owned a 1957 MGA that had two 6-V batteries
in series, rather than a single 12-V battery. This arrangement produced a large internal resistance that caused him
many problems in starting the engine.
FIGURE21.15A series connection of two voltage sources. The emfs (each labeled with a script E) and internal resistances add, giving a
total emf of and a total internal resistance of .
FIGURE21.16Batteries are multiple connections of individual cells, as shown in this modern rendition of an old print. Single cells, such as
AA or C cells, are commonly called batteries, although this is technically incorrect.
If theseriesconnection of two voltage sources is made into a complete circuit with the emfs in opposition, then a
current of magnitude flows. SeeFigure 21.17, for example, which shows a circuit exactly
analogous to the battery charger discussed above. If two voltage sources in series with emfs in the same sense are
connected to a load , as inFigure 21.18, then flows.
FIGURE21.17These two voltage sources are connected in series with their emfs in opposition. Current flows in the direction of the greater
emf and is limited to by the sum of the internal resistances. (Note that each emf is represented by script E in the figure.)
A battery charger connected to a battery is an example of such a connection. The charger must have a larger emf than the battery to reverse
current through it.
PAGE: 938
920 21 • Circuits and DC Instruments
FIGURE21.18This schematic represents a flashlight with two cells (voltage sources) and a single bulb (load resistance) in series. The
current that flows is . (Note that each emf is represented by script E in the figure.)
Take-Home Experiment: Flashlight Batteries
Find a flashlight that uses several batteries and find new and old batteries. Based on the discussions in this
module, predict the brightness of the flashlight when different combinations of batteries are used. Do your
predictions match what you observe? Now place new batteries in the flashlight and leave the flashlight switched
on for several hours. Is the flashlight still quite bright? Do the same with the old batteries. Is the flashlight as
bright when left on for the same length of time with old and new batteries? What does this say for the case when
you are limited in the number of available new batteries?
Figure 21.19shows two voltage sources with identical emfs in parallel and connected to a load resistance. In this
simple case, the total emf is the same as the individual emfs. But the total internal resistance is reduced, since the
internal resistances are in parallel. The parallel connection thus can produce a larger current.
Here, flows through the load, and is less than those of the individual batteries. For example,
some diesel-powered cars use two 12-V batteries in parallel; they produce a total emf of 12 V but can deliver the
larger current needed to start a diesel engine.
FIGURE21.19Two voltage sources with identical emfs (each labeled by script E) connected in parallel produce the same emf but have a
smaller total internal resistance than the individual sources. Parallel combinations are often used to deliver more current. Here
flows through the load.
Animals as Electrical Detectors
A number of animals both produce and detect electrical signals. Fish, sharks, platypuses, and echidnas (spiny
anteaters) all detect electric fields generated by nerve activity in prey. Electric eels produce their own emf through
biological cells (electric organs) called electroplaques, which are arranged in both series and parallel as a set of
batteries.
Electroplaques are flat, disk-like cells; those of the electric eel have a voltage of 0.15 V across each one. These cells
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 939
21.2 • Electromotive Force: Terminal Voltage 921
are usually located toward the head or tail of the animal, although in the case of the electric eel, they are found
along the entire body. The electroplaques in the South American eel are arranged in 140 rows, with each row
stretching horizontally along the body and containing 5,000 electroplaques. This can yield an emf of approximately
600 V, and a current of 1 A—deadly.
The mechanism for detection of external electric fields is similar to that for producing nerve signals in the cell
through depolarization and repolarization—the movement of ions across the cell membrane. Within the fish, weak
electric fields in the water produce a current in a gel-filled canal that runs from the skin to sensing cells, producing a
nerve signal. The Australian platypus, one of the very few mammals that lay eggs, can detect fields of 30 , while
sharks have been found to be able to sense a field in their snouts as small as 100 (Figure 21.20). Electric eels
use their own electric fields produced by the electroplaques to stun their prey or enemies.
FIGURE21.20Sand tiger sharks (Carcharias taurus), like this one at the Minnesota Zoo, use electroreceptors in their snouts to locate prey.
(credit: Jim Winstead, Flickr)
Solar Cell Arrays
Another example dealing with multiple voltage sources is that of combinations of solar cells—wired in both series
and parallel combinations to yield a desired voltage and current. Photovoltaic generation (PV), the conversion of
sunlight directly into electricity, is based upon the photoelectric effect, in which photons hitting the surface of a
solar cell create an electric current in the cell.
Most solar cells are made from pure silicon—either as single-crystal silicon, or as a thin film of silicon deposited
upon a glass or metal backing. Most single cells have a voltage output of about 0.5 V, while the current output is a
function of the amount of sunlight upon the cell (the incident solar radiation—the insolation). Under bright noon
sunlight, a current of about of cell surface area is produced by typical single-crystal cells.
Individual solar cells are connected electrically in modules to meet electrical-energy needs. They can be wired
together in series or in parallel—connected like the batteries discussed earlier. A solar-cell array or module usually
consists of between 36 and 72 cells, with a power output of 50 W to 140 W.
The output of the solar cells is direct current. For most uses in a home, AC is required, so a device called an inverter
must be used to convert the DC to AC. Any extra output can then be passed on to the outside electrical grid for sale
to the utility.
Take-Home Experiment: Virtual Solar Cells
One can assemble a “virtual” solar cell array by using playing cards, or business or index cards, to represent a
solar cell. Combinations of these cards in series and/or parallel can model the required array output. Assume
each card has an output of 0.5 V and a current (under bright light) of 2 A. Using your cards, how would you
PAGE: 940
922 21 • Circuits and DC Instruments
arrange them to produce an output of 6 A at 3 V (18 W)?
Suppose you were told that you needed only 18 W (but no required voltage). Would you need more cards to
make this arrangement?
21.3 Kirchhoff’s Rules
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Analyze a complex circuit using Kirchhoff’s rules, using the conventions for determining the correct signs
of various terms.
Many complex circuits, such as the one inFigure 21.21, cannot be analyzed with the series-parallel techniques
developed inResistors in Series and ParallelandElectromotive Force: Terminal Voltage. There are, however, two
circuit analysis rules that can be used to analyze any circuit, simple or complex. These rules are special cases of the
laws of conservation of charge and conservation of energy. The rules are known asKirchhoff’s rules, after their
inventor Gustav Kirchhoff (1824–1887).
FIGURE21.21This circuit cannot be reduced to a combination of series and parallel connections. Kirchhoff’s rules, special applications of
the laws of conservation of charge and energy, can be used to analyze it. (Note: The script E in the figure represents electromotive force,
emf.)
Kirchhoff’s Rules
• Kirchhoff’s first rule—the junction rule. The sum of all currents entering a junction must equal the sum of all
currents leaving the junction.
• Kirchhoff’s second rule—the loop rule. The algebraic sum of changes in potential around any closed circuit
path (loop) must be zero.
Explanations of the two rules will now be given, followed by problem-solving hints for applying Kirchhoff’s rules, and
a worked example that uses them.
Kirchhoff’s First Rule
Kirchhoff’s first rule (thejunction rule) is an application of the conservation of charge to a junction; it is illustrated in
Figure 21.22. Current is the flow of charge, and charge is conserved; thus, whatever charge flows into the junction
must flow out. Kirchhoff’s first rule requires that (see figure). Equations like this can and will be used
to analyze circuits and to solve circuit problems.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 941
21.3 • Kirchhoff’s Rules 923
Making Connections: Conservation Laws
Kirchhoff’s rules for circuit analysis are applications ofconservation lawsto circuits. The first rule is the
application of conservation of charge, while the second rule is the application of conservation of energy.
Conservation laws, even used in a specific application, such as circuit analysis, are so basic as to form the
foundation of that application.
FIGURE21.22The junction rule. The diagram shows an example of Kirchhoff’s first rule where the sum of the currents into a junction
equals the sum of the currents out of a junction. In this case, the current going into the junction splits and comes out as two currents, so
that . Here must be 11 A, since is 7 A and is 4 A.
Kirchhoff’s Second Rule
Kirchhoff’s second rule (theloop rule) is an application of conservation of energy. The loop rule is stated in terms of
potential, , rather than potential energy, but the two are related since . Recall thatemfis the potential
difference of a source when no current is flowing. In a closed loop, whatever energy is supplied by emf must be
transferred into other forms by devices in the loop, since there are no other ways in which energy can be transferred
into or out of the circuit.Figure 21.23illustrates the changes in potential in a simple series circuit loop.
Kirchhoff’s second rule requires . Rearranged, this is , which
means the emf equals the sum of the (voltage) drops in the loop.
FIGURE21.23The loop rule. An example of Kirchhoff’s second rule where the sum of the changes in potential around a closed loop must
be zero. (a) In this standard schematic of a simple series circuit, the emf supplies 18 V, which is reduced to zero by the resistances, with 1 V
PAGE: 942
924 21 • Circuits and DC Instruments
across the internal resistance, and 12 V and 5 V across the two load resistances, for a total of 18 V. (b) This perspective view represents the
potential as something like a roller coaster, where charge is raised in potential by the emf and lowered by the resistances. (Note that the
script E stands for emf.)
Applying Kirchhoff’s Rules
By applying Kirchhoff’s rules, we generate equations that allow us to find the unknowns in circuits. The unknowns
may be currents, emfs, or resistances. Each time a rule is applied, an equation is produced. If there are as many
independent equations as unknowns, then the problem can be solved. There are two decisions you must make
when applying Kirchhoff’s rules. These decisions determine the signs of various quantities in the equations you
obtain from applying the rules.
1. When applying Kirchhoff’s first rule, the junction rule, you must label the current in each branch and decide in
what direction it is going. For example, inFigure 21.21,Figure 21.22, andFigure 21.23, currents are labeled ,
, , and , and arrows indicate their directions. There is no risk here, for if you choose the wrong direction,
the current will be of the correct magnitude but negative.
2. When applying Kirchhoff’s second rule, the loop rule, you must identify a closed loop and decide in which
direction to go around it, clockwise or counterclockwise. For example, inFigure 21.23the loop was traversed in
the same direction as the current (clockwise). Again, there is no risk; going around the circuit in the opposite
direction reverses the sign of every term in the equation, which is like multiplying both sides of the equation by
Figure 21.24and the following points will help you get the plus or minus signs right when applying the loop rule.
Note that the resistors and emfs are traversed by going from a to b. In many circuits, it will be necessary to construct
more than one loop. In traversing each loop, one needs to be consistent for the sign of the change in potential. (See
Example 21.5.)
FIGURE21.24Each of these resistors and voltage sources is traversed from a to b. The potential changes are shown beneath each element
and are explained in the text. (Note that the script E stands for emf.)
• When a resistor is traversed in the same direction as the current, the change in potential is . (SeeFigure
21.24.)
• When a resistor is traversed in the direction opposite to the current, the change in potential is . (SeeFigure
21.24.)
• When an emf is traversed from to + (the same direction it moves positive charge), the change in potential is
+emf. (SeeFigure 21.24.)
• When an emf is traversed from + to (opposite to the direction it moves positive charge), the change in
potential is emf. (SeeFigure 21.24.)
EXAMPLE 21.5
Calculating Current: Using Kirchhoff’s Rules
Find the currents flowing in the circuit inFigure 21.25.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 943
21.3 • Kirchhoff’s Rules 925
FIGURE21.25This circuit is similar to that inFigure 21.21, but the resistances and emfs are specified. (Each emf is denoted by script E.)
The currents in each branch are labeled and assumed to move in the directions shown. This example uses Kirchhoff’s rules to find the
currents.
Strategy
This circuit is sufficiently complex that the currents cannot be found using Ohm’s law and the series-parallel
techniques—it is necessary to use Kirchhoff’s rules. Currents have been labeled , , and in the figure and
assumptions have been made about their directions. Locations on the diagram have been labeled with letters a
through h. In the solution we will apply the junction and loop rules, seeking three independent equations to allow us
to solve for the three unknown currents.
Solution
We begin by applying Kirchhoff’s first or junction rule at point a. This gives
21.54
since flows into the junction, while and flow out. Applying the junction rule at e produces exactly the same
equation, so that no new information is obtained. This is a single equation with three unknowns—three independent
equations are needed, and so the loop rule must be applied.
Now we consider the loop abcdea. Going from a to b, we traverse in the same (assumed) direction of the current
, and so the change in potential is . Then going from b to c, we go from to +, so that the change in
potential is . Traversing the internal resistance from c to d gives . Completing the loop by going from
d to a again traverses a resistor in the same direction as its current, giving a change in potential of .
The loop rule states that the changes in potential sum to zero. Thus,
21.55
Substituting values from the circuit diagram for the resistances and emf, and canceling the ampere unit gives
21.56
Now applying the loop rule to aefgha (we could have chosen abcdefgha as well) similarly gives
21.57
Note that the signs are reversed compared with the other loop, because elements are traversed in the opposite
direction. With values entered, this becomes
21.58
These three equations are sufficient to solve for the three unknown currents. First, solve the second equation for :
PAGE: 944
926 21 • Circuits and DC Instruments
21.59
Now solve the third equation for :
21.60
Substituting these two new equations into the first one allows us to find a value for :
21.61
Combining terms gives
21.62
21.63
Substituting this value for back into the fourth equation gives
21.64
21.65
The minus sign means flows in the direction opposite to that assumed inFigure 21.25.
Finally, substituting the value for into the fifth equation gives
21.66
21.67
Discussion
Just as a check, we note that indeed . The results could also have been checked by entering all of the
values into the equation for the abcdefgha loop.
Problem-Solving Strategies for Kirchhoff’s Rules
1. Make certain there is a clear circuit diagram on which you can label all known and unknown resistances,
emfs, and currents. If a current is unknown, you must assign it a direction. This is necessary for determining
the signs of potential changes. If you assign the direction incorrectly, the current will be found to have a
negative value—no harm done.
2. Apply the junction rule to any junction in the circuit. Each time the junction rule is applied, you should get an
equation with a current that does not appear in a previous application—if not, then the equation is
redundant.
3. Apply the loop rule to as many loops as needed to solve for the unknowns in the problem. (There must be as
many independent equations as unknowns.) To apply the loop rule, you must choose a direction to go
around the loop. Then carefully and consistently determine the signs of the potential changes for each
element using the four bulleted points discussed above in conjunction withFigure 21.24.
4. Solve the simultaneous equations for the unknowns. This may involve many algebraic steps, requiring
careful checking and rechecking.
5. Check to see whether the answers are reasonable and consistent. The numbers should be of the correct
order of magnitude, neither exceedingly large nor vanishingly small. The signs should be reasonable—for
example, no resistance should be negative. Check to see that the values obtained satisfy the various
equations obtained from applying the rules. The currents should satisfy the junction rule, for example.
The material in this section is correct in theory. We should be able to verify it by making measurements of current
and voltage. In fact, some of the devices used to make such measurements are straightforward applications of the
principles covered so far and are explored in the next modules. As we shall see, a very basic, even profound, fact
results—making a measurement alters the quantity being measured.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 945
21.4 • DC Voltmeters and Ammeters 927
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Can Kirchhoff’s rules be applied to simple series and parallel circuits or are they restricted for use in more
complicated circuits that are not combinations of series and parallel?
Solution
Kirchhoff's rules can be applied to any circuit since they are applications to circuits of two conservation laws.
Conservation laws are the most broadly applicable principles in physics. It is usually mathematically simpler to use
the rules for series and parallel in simpler circuits so we emphasize Kirchhoff’s rules for use in more complicated
situations. But the rules for series and parallel can be derived from Kirchhoff’s rules. Moreover, Kirchhoff’s rules can
be expanded to devices other than resistors and emfs, such as capacitors, and are one of the basic analysis devices
in circuit analysis.
21.4 DC Voltmeters and Ammeters
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain why a voltmeter must be connected in parallel with the circuit.
• Draw a diagram showing an ammeter correctly connected in a circuit.
• Describe how a galvanometer can be used as either a voltmeter or an ammeter.
• Find the resistance that must be placed in series with a galvanometer to allow it to be used as a voltmeter
with a given reading.
• Explain why measuring the voltage or current in a circuit can never be exact.
Voltmetersmeasure voltage, whereasammetersmeasure current. Some of the meters in automobile dashboards,
digital cameras, cell phones, and tuner-amplifiers are voltmeters or ammeters. (SeeFigure 21.26.) The internal
construction of the simplest of these meters and how they are connected to the system they monitor give further
insight into applications of series and parallel connections.
FIGURE21.26The fuel and temperature gauges (far right and far left, respectively) in this 1996 Volkswagen are voltmeters that register
the voltage output of “sender” units, which are hopefully proportional to the amount of gasoline in the tank and the engine temperature.
(credit: Christian Giersing)
Voltmeters are connected in parallel with whatever device’s voltage is to be measured. A parallel connection is used
because objects in parallel experience the same potential difference. (SeeFigure 21.27, where the voltmeter is
represented by the symbol V.)
Ammeters are connected in series with whatever device’s current is to be measured. A series connection is used
because objects in series have the same current passing through them. (SeeFigure 21.28, where the ammeter is
represented by the symbol A.)
PAGE: 946
928 21 • Circuits and DC Instruments
FIGURE21.27(a) To measure potential differences in this series circuit, the voltmeter (V) is placed in parallel with the voltage source or
either of the resistors. Note that terminal voltage is measured between points a and b. It is not possible to connect the voltmeter directly
across the emf without including its internal resistance, . (b) A digital voltmeter in use. (credit: Messtechniker, Wikimedia Commons)
FIGURE21.28An ammeter (A) is placed in series to measure current. All of the current in this circuit flows through the meter. The ammeter
would have the same reading if located between points d and e or between points f and a as it does in the position shown. (Note that the
script capital E stands for emf, and stands for the internal resistance of the source of potential difference.)
Analog Meters: Galvanometers
Analog metershave a needle that swivels to point at numbers on a scale, as opposed todigital meters, which have
numerical readouts similar to a hand-held calculator. The heart of most analog meters is a device called a
galvanometer, denoted by G. Current flow through a galvanometer, , produces a proportional needle deflection.
(This deflection is due to the force of a magnetic field upon a current-carrying wire.)
The two crucial characteristics of a given galvanometer are its resistance and current sensitivity.Current sensitivity
is the current that gives afull-scale deflectionof the galvanometer’s needle, the maximum current that the
instrument can measure. For example, a galvanometer with a current sensitivity of has a maximum deflection
of its needle when flows through it, reads half-scale when flows through it, and so on.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 947
21.4 • DC Voltmeters and Ammeters 929
If such a galvanometer has a resistance, then a voltage of only produces
a full-scale reading. By connecting resistors to this galvanometer in different ways, you can use it as either a
voltmeter or ammeter that can measure a broad range of voltages or currents.
Galvanometer as Voltmeter
Figure 21.29shows how a galvanometer can be used as a voltmeter by connecting it in series with a large
resistance, . The value of the resistance is determined by the maximum voltage to be measured. Suppose you
want 10 V to produce a full-scale deflection of a voltmeter containing a galvanometer with a sensitivity.
Then 10 V applied to the meter must produce a current of . The total resistance must be
21.68
21.69
( is so large that the galvanometer resistance, , is nearly negligible.) Note that 5 V applied to this voltmeter
produces a half-scale deflection by producing a current through the meter, and so the voltmeter’s reading is
proportional to voltage as desired.
This voltmeter would not be useful for voltages less than about half a volt, because the meter deflection would be
small and difficult to read accurately. For other voltage ranges, other resistances are placed in series with the
galvanometer. Many meters have a choice of scales. That choice involves switching an appropriate resistance into
series with the galvanometer.
FIGURE21.29A large resistance placed in series with a galvanometer G produces a voltmeter, the full-scale deflection of which depends
on the choice of . The larger the voltage to be measured, the larger must be. (Note that represents the internal resistance of the
galvanometer.)
Galvanometer as Ammeter
The same galvanometer can also be made into an ammeter by placing it in parallel with a small resistance , often
called theshunt resistance, as shown inFigure 21.30. Since the shunt resistance is small, most of the current
passes through it, allowing an ammeter to measure currents much greater than those producing a full-scale
deflection of the galvanometer.
Suppose, for example, an ammeter is needed that gives a full-scale deflection for 1.0 A, and contains the same
galvanometer with its sensitivity. Since and are in parallel, the voltage across them is the same.
These drops are so that . Solving for , and noting that is and is
0.999950 A, we have
× 21.70
FIGURE21.30A small shunt resistance placed in parallel with a galvanometer G produces an ammeter, the full-scale deflection of which
depends on the choice of . The larger the current to be measured, the smaller must be. Most of the current ( ) flowing through the
meter is shunted through to protect the galvanometer. (Note that represents the internal resistance of the galvanometer.) Ammeters
may also have multiple scales for greater flexibility in application. The various scales are achieved by switching various shunt resistances in
parallel with the galvanometer—the greater the maximum current to be measured, the smaller the shunt resistance must be.
Taking Measurements Alters the Circuit
When you use a voltmeter or ammeter, you are connecting another resistor to an existing circuit and, thus, altering
PAGE: 948
930 21 • Circuits and DC Instruments
the circuit. Ideally, voltmeters and ammeters do not appreciably affect the circuit, but it is instructive to examine the
circumstances under which they do or do not interfere.
First, consider the voltmeter, which is always placed in parallel with the device being measured. Very little current
flows through the voltmeter if its resistance is a few orders of magnitude greater than the device, and so the circuit
is not appreciably affected. (SeeFigure 21.31(a).) (A large resistance in parallel with a small one has a combined
resistance essentially equal to the small one.) If, however, the voltmeter’s resistance is comparable to that of the
device being measured, then the two in parallel have a smaller resistance, appreciably affecting the circuit. (See
Figure 21.31(b).) The voltage across the device is not the same as when the voltmeter is out of the circuit.
FIGURE21.31(a) A voltmeter having a resistance much larger than the device ( ) with which it is in parallel produces a
parallel resistance essentially the same as the device and does not appreciably affect the circuit being measured. (b) Here the voltmeter
has the same resistance as the device ( ), so that the parallel resistance is half of what it is when the voltmeter is not
connected. This is an example of a significant alteration of the circuit and is to be avoided.
An ammeter is placed in series in the branch of the circuit being measured, so that its resistance adds to that
branch. Normally, the ammeter’s resistance is very small compared with the resistances of the devices in the circuit,
and so the extra resistance is negligible. (SeeFigure 21.32(a).) However, if very small load resistances are involved,
or if the ammeter is not as low in resistance as it should be, then the total series resistance is significantly greater,
and the current in the branch being measured is reduced. (SeeFigure 21.32(b).)
A practical problem can occur if the ammeter is connected incorrectly. If it was put in parallel with the resistor to
measure the current in it, you could possibly damage the meter; the low resistance of the ammeter would allow
most of the current in the circuit to go through the galvanometer, and this current would be larger since the effective
resistance is smaller.
FIGURE21.32(a) An ammeter normally has such a small resistance that the total series resistance in the branch being measured is not
appreciably increased. The circuit is essentially unaltered compared with when the ammeter is absent. (b) Here the ammeter’s resistance is
the same as that of the branch, so that the total resistance is doubled and the current is half what it is without the ammeter. This significant
alteration of the circuit is to be avoided.
One solution to the problem of voltmeters and ammeters interfering with the circuits being measured is to use
galvanometers with greater sensitivity. This allows construction of voltmeters with greater resistance and ammeters
with smaller resistance than when less sensitive galvanometers are used.
There are practical limits to galvanometer sensitivity, but it is possible to get analog meters that make
measurements accurate to a few percent. Note that the inaccuracy comes from altering the circuit, not from a fault
in the meter.
Connections: Limits to Knowledge
Making a measurement alters the system being measured in a manner that produces uncertainty in the
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 949
21.5 • Null Measurements 931
measurement. For macroscopic systems, such as the circuits discussed in this module, the alteration can
usually be made negligibly small, but it cannot be eliminated entirely. For submicroscopic systems, such as
atoms, nuclei, and smaller particles, measurement alters the system in a manner that cannot be made arbitrarily
small. This actually limits knowledge of the system—even limiting what nature can know about itself. We shall
see profound implications of this when the Heisenberg uncertainty principle is discussed in the modules on
quantum mechanics.
There is another measurement technique based on drawing no current at all and, hence, not altering the circuit
at all. These are called null measurements and are the topic ofNull Measurements. Digital meters that employ
solid-state electronics and null measurements can attain accuracies of one part in .
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Digital meters are able to detect smaller currents than analog meters employing galvanometers. How does this
explain their ability to measure voltage and current more accurately than analog meters?
Solution
Since digital meters require less current than analog meters, they alter the circuit less than analog meters. Their
resistance as a voltmeter can be far greater than an analog meter, and their resistance as an ammeter can be far
less than an analog meter. ConsultFigure 21.27andFigure 21.28and their discussion in the text.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Circuit Construction Kit (DC Only), Virtual Lab
Stimulate a neuron and monitor what happens. Pause, rewind, and move forward in time in order to observe the ions
as they move across the neuron membrane.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/21-4-dc-voltmeters-and-ammeters)
21.5 Null Measurements
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain why a null measurement device is more accurate than a standard voltmeter or ammeter.
• Demonstrate how a Wheatstone bridge can be used to accurately calculate the resistance in a circuit.
Standard measurements of voltage and current alter the circuit being measured, introducing uncertainties in the
measurements. Voltmeters draw some extra current, whereas ammeters reduce current flow.Null measurements
balance voltages so that there is no current flowing through the measuring device and, therefore, no alteration of the
circuit being measured.
Null measurements are generally more accurate but are also more complex than the use of standard voltmeters and
ammeters, and they still have limits to their precision. In this module, we shall consider a few specific types of null
measurements, because they are common and interesting, and they further illuminate principles of electric circuits.
The Potentiometer
Suppose you wish to measure the emf of a battery. Consider what happens if you connect the battery directly to a
standard voltmeter as shown inFigure 21.33. (Once we note the problems with this measurement, we will examine
a null measurement that improves accuracy.) As discussed before, the actual quantity measured is the terminal
voltage , which is related to the emf of the battery by , where is the current that flows and is the
internal resistance of the battery.
The emf could be accurately calculated if were very accurately known, but it is usually not. If the current could
be made zero, then , and so emf could be directly measured. However, standard voltmeters need a current
to operate; thus, another technique is needed.
PAGE: 950
932 21 • Circuits and DC Instruments
FIGURE21.33An analog voltmeter attached to a battery draws a small but nonzero current and measures a terminal voltage that differs
from the emf of the battery. (Note that the script capital E symbolizes electromotive force, or emf.) Since the internal resistance of the
battery is not known precisely, it is not possible to calculate the emf precisely.
Apotentiometeris a null measurement device for measuring potentials (voltages). (SeeFigure 21.34.) A voltage
source is connected to a resistor say, a long wire, and passes a constant current through it. There is a steady drop
in potential (an drop) along the wire, so that a variable potential can be obtained by making contact at varying
locations along the wire.
Figure 21.34(b) shows an unknown (represented by script in the figure) connected in series with a
galvanometer. Note that opposes the other voltage source. The location of the contact point (see the arrow on
the drawing) is adjusted until the galvanometer reads zero. When the galvanometer reads zero, , where
is the resistance of the section of wire up to the contact point. Since no current flows through the galvanometer,
none flows through the unknown emf, and so is directly sensed.
Now, a very precisely known standard is substituted for , and the contact point is adjusted until the
galvanometer again reads zero, so that . In both cases, no current passes through the galvanometer,
and so the current through the long wire is the same. Upon taking the ratio , cancels, giving
21.71
Solving for gives
21.72
FIGURE21.34The potentiometer, a null measurement device. (a) A voltage source connected to a long wire resistor passes a constant
current through it. (b) An unknown emf (labeled script in the figure) is connected as shown, and the point of contact along is
adjusted until the galvanometer reads zero. The segment of wire has a resistance and script , where is unaffected by the
connection since no current flows through the galvanometer. The unknown emf is thus proportional to the resistance of the wire segment.
Because a long uniform wire is used for , the ratio of resistances is the same as the ratio of the lengths of
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 951
21.5 • Null Measurements 933
wire that zero the galvanometer for each emf. The three quantities on the right-hand side of the equation are now
known or measured, and can be calculated. The uncertainty in this calculation can be considerably smaller
than when using a voltmeter directly, but it is not zero. There is always some uncertainty in the ratio of resistances
and in the standard . Furthermore, it is not possible to tell when the galvanometer reads exactly zero,
which introduces error into both and , and may also affect the current .
Resistance Measurements and the Wheatstone Bridge
There is a variety of so-calledohmmetersthat purport to measure resistance. What the most common ohmmeters
actually do is to apply a voltage to a resistance, measure the current, and calculate the resistance using Ohm’s law.
Their readout is this calculated resistance. Two configurations for ohmmeters using standard voltmeters and
ammeters are shown inFigure 21.35. Such configurations are limited in accuracy, because the meters alter both the
voltage applied to the resistor and the current that flows through it.
FIGURE21.35Two methods for measuring resistance with standard meters. (a) Assuming a known voltage for the source, an ammeter
measures current, and resistance is calculated as . (b) Since the terminal voltage varies with current, it is better to measure it.
is most accurately known when is small, but itself is most accurately known when it is large.
TheWheatstone bridgeis a null measurement device for calculating resistance by balancing potential drops in a
circuit. (SeeFigure 21.36.) The device is called a bridge because the galvanometer forms a bridge between two
branches. A variety ofbridge devicesare used to make null measurements in circuits.
Resistors and are precisely known, while the arrow through indicates that it is a variable resistance. The
value of can be precisely read. With the unknown resistance in the circuit, is adjusted until the
galvanometer reads zero. The potential difference between points b and d is then zero, meaning that b and d are at
the same potential. With no current running through the galvanometer, it has no effect on the rest of the circuit. So
the branches abc and adc are in parallel, and each branch has the full voltage of the source. That is, the drops
along abc and adc are the same. Since b and d are at the same potential, the drop along ad must equal the
drop along ab. Thus,
21.73
Again, since b and d are at the same potential, the drop along dc must equal the drop along bc. Thus,
21.74
Taking the ratio of these last two expressions gives
21.75
Canceling the currents and solving for R yields
x
21.76
PAGE: 952
934 21 • Circuits and DC Instruments
FIGURE21.36The Wheatstone bridge is used to calculate unknown resistances. The variable resistance is adjusted until the
galvanometer reads zero with the switch closed. This simplifies the circuit, allowing to be calculated based on the drops as
discussed in the text.
This equation is used to calculate the unknown resistance when current through the galvanometer is zero. This
method can be very accurate (often to four significant digits), but it is limited by two factors. First, it is not possible
to get the current through the galvanometer to be exactly zero. Second, there are always uncertainties in , ,
and , which contribute to the uncertainty in .
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Identify other factors that might limit the accuracy of null measurements. Would the use of a digital device that is
more sensitive than a galvanometer improve the accuracy of null measurements?
Solution
One factor would be resistance in the wires and connections in a null measurement. These are impossible to make
zero, and they can change over time. Another factor would be temperature variations in resistance, which can be
reduced but not completely eliminated by choice of material. Digital devices sensitive to smaller currents than
analog devices do improve the accuracy of null measurements because they allow you to get the current closer to
zero.
21.6 DC Circuits Containing Resistors and Capacitors
• Explain the importance of the time constant, τ , and calculate the time constant for a given resistance and
capacitance.
• Explain why batteries in a flashlight gradually lose power and the light dims over time.
• Describe what happens to a graph of the voltage across a capacitor over time as it charges.
• Explain how a timing circuit works and list some applications.
• Calculate the necessary speed of a strobe flash needed to “stop” the movement of an object over a particular
length.
When you use a flash camera, it takes a few seconds to charge the capacitor that powers the flash. The light flash
discharges the capacitor in a tiny fraction of a second. Why does charging take longer than discharging? This
question and a number of other phenomena that involve charging and discharging capacitors are discussed in this
module.
RCCircuits
AnRCcircuitis one containing aresistorRand acapacitorC. The capacitor is an electrical component that stores
electric charge.
Figure 21.37shows a simpleRCcircuit that employs a DC (direct current) voltage source. The capacitor is initially
uncharged. As soon as the switch is closed, current flows to and from the initially uncharged capacitor. As charge
increases on the capacitor plates, there is increasing opposition to the flow of charge by the repulsion of like charges
on each plate.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 953
21.6 • DC Circuits Containing Resistors and Capacitors 935
In terms of voltage, this is because voltage across the capacitor is given by , where is the amount of
charge stored on each plate and is thecapacitance. This voltage opposes the battery, growing from zero to the
maximum emf when fully charged. The current thus decreases from its initial value of to zero as the
voltage on the capacitor reaches the same value as the emf. When there is no current, there is no drop, and so
the voltage on the capacitor must then equal the emf of the voltage source. This can also be explained with
Kirchhoff’s second rule (the loop rule), discussed inKirchhoff’s Rules, which says that the algebraic sum of changes
in potential around any closed loop must be zero.
The initial current is , because all of the drop is in the resistance. Therefore, the smaller the resistance,
the faster a given capacitor will be charged. Note that the internal resistance of the voltage source is included in ,
as are the resistances of the capacitor and the connecting wires. In the flash camera scenario above, when the
batteries powering the camera begin to wear out, their internal resistance rises, reducing the current and
lengthening the time it takes to get ready for the next flash.
FIGURE21.37(a) An circuit with an initially uncharged capacitor. Current flows in the direction shown (opposite of electron flow) as
soon as the switch is closed. Mutual repulsion of like charges in the capacitor progressively slows the flow as the capacitor is charged,
stopping the current when the capacitor is fully charged and . (b) A graph of voltage across the capacitor versus time, with the
switch closing at time . (Note that in the two parts of the figure, the capital script E stands for emf, stands for the charge stored on
the capacitor, and is the time constant.)
Voltage on the capacitor is initially zero and rises rapidly at first, since the initial current is a maximum.Figure
21.37(b) shows a graph of capacitor voltage versus time ( ) starting when the switch is closed at . The voltage
approaches emf asymptotically, since the closer it gets to emf the less current flows. The equation for voltage
versus time when charging a capacitor through a resistor , derived using calculus, is
21.77
where is the voltage across the capacitor, emf is equal to the emf of the DC voltage source, and the exponential e
= 2.718 … is the base of the natural logarithm. Note that the units of are seconds. We define
21.78
where (the Greek letter tau) is called the time constant for an circuit. As noted before, a small resistance
allows the capacitor to charge faster. This is reasonable, since a larger current flows through a smaller resistance. It
is also reasonable that the smaller the capacitor , the less time needed to charge it. Both factors are contained in
.
More quantitatively, consider what happens when . Then the voltage on the capacitor is
21.79
This means that in the time , the voltage rises to 0.632 of its final value. The voltage will rise 0.632 of the
remainder in the next time . It is a characteristic of the exponential function that the final value is never reached,
but 0.632 of the remainder to that value is achieved in every time, . In just a few multiples of the time constant ,
then, the final value is very nearly achieved, as the graph inFigure 21.37(b) illustrates.
Discharging a Capacitor
Discharging a capacitor through a resistor proceeds in a similar fashion, asFigure 21.38illustrates. Initially, the
current is , driven by the initial voltage on the capacitor. As the voltage decreases, the current and
PAGE: 954
936 21 • Circuits and DC Instruments
hence the rate of discharge decreases, implying another exponential formula for . Using calculus, the voltage on
a capacitor being discharged through a resistor is found to be
21.80
FIGURE21.38(a) Closing the switch discharges the capacitor through the resistor . Mutual repulsion of like charges on each plate
drives the current. (b) A graph of voltage across the capacitor versus time, with at . The voltage decreases exponentially,
falling a fixed fraction of the way to zero in each subsequent time constant .
The graph inFigure 21.38(b) is an example of this exponential decay. Again, the time constant is . A small
resistance allows the capacitor to discharge in a small time, since the current is larger. Similarly, a small
capacitance requires less time to discharge, since less charge is stored. In the first time interval after the
switch is closed, the voltage falls to 0.368 of its initial value, since .
During each successive time , the voltage falls to 0.368 of its preceding value. In a few multiples of , the voltage
becomes very close to zero, as indicated by the graph inFigure 21.38(b).
Now we can explain why the flash camera in our scenario takes so much longer to charge than discharge; the
resistance while charging is significantly greater than while discharging. The internal resistance of the battery
accounts for most of the resistance while charging. As the battery ages, the increasing internal resistance makes the
charging process even slower. (You may have noticed this.)
The flash discharge is through a low-resistance ionized gas in the flash tube and proceeds very rapidly. Flash
photographs, such as inFigure 21.39, can capture a brief instant of a rapid motion because the flash can be less
than a microsecond in duration. Such flashes can be made extremely intense.
During World War II, nighttime reconnaissance photographs were made from the air with a single flash illuminating
more than a square kilometer of enemy territory. The brevity of the flash eliminated blurring due to the surveillance
aircraft’s motion. Today, an important use of intense flash lamps is to pump energy into a laser. The short intense
flash can rapidly energize a laser and allow it to reemit the energy in another form.
FIGURE21.39This stop-motion photograph of a rufous hummingbird (Selasphorus rufus) feeding on a flower was obtained with an
extremely brief and intense flash of light powered by the discharge of a capacitor through a gas. (credit: Dean E. Biggins, U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 955
21.6 • DC Circuits Containing Resistors and Capacitors 937
EXAMPLE 21.6
Integrated Concept Problem: Calculating Capacitor Size—Strobe Lights
High-speed flash photography was pioneered by Doc Edgerton in the 1930s, while he was a professor of electrical
engineering at MIT. You might have seen examples of his work in the amazing shots of hummingbirds in motion, a
drop of milk splattering on a table, or a bullet penetrating an apple (seeFigure 21.39). To stop the motion and
capture these pictures, one needs a high-intensity, very short pulsed flash, as mentioned earlier in this module.
Suppose one wished to capture the picture of a bullet (moving at ) that was passing through an apple.
The duration of the flash is related to the time constant, . What size capacitor would one need in the circuit
to succeed, if the resistance of the flash tube was ? Assume the apple is a sphere with a diameter of
Strategy
We begin by identifying the physical principles involved. This example deals with the strobe light, as discussed
above.Figure 21.38shows the circuit for this probe. The characteristic time of the strobe is given as .
Solution
We wish to find , but we don’t know . We want the flash to be on only while the bullet traverses the apple. So we
need to use the kinematic equations that describe the relationship between distance , velocity , and time :
21.81
The bullet’s velocity is given as , and the distance is The traverse time, then, is
21.82
We set this value for the crossing time equal to . Therefore,
×
21.83
(Note: Capacitance is typically measured in farads, , defined as Coulombs per volt. From the equation, we see
that can also be stated in units of seconds per ohm.)
Discussion
The flash interval of (the traverse time of the bullet) is relatively easy to obtain today. Strobe lights have
opened up new worlds from science to entertainment. The information from the picture of the apple and bullet was
used in the Warren Commission Report on the assassination of President John F. Kennedy in 1963 to confirm that
only one bullet was fired.
RCCircuits for Timing
circuits are commonly used for timing purposes. A mundane example of this is found in the ubiquitous
intermittent wiper systems of modern cars. The time between wipes is varied by adjusting the resistance in an
circuit. Another example of an circuit is found in novelty jewelry, Halloween costumes, and various toys that
have battery-powered flashing lights. (SeeFigure 21.40for a timing circuit.)
A more crucial use of circuits for timing purposes is in the artificial pacemaker, used to control heart rate. The
heart rate is normally controlled by electrical signals generated by the sino-atrial (SA) node, which is on the wall of
the right atrium chamber. This causes the muscles to contract and pump blood. Sometimes the heart rhythm is
abnormal and the heartbeat is too high or too low.
The artificial pacemaker is inserted near the heart to provide electrical signals to the heart when needed with the
PAGE: 956
938 21 • Circuits and DC Instruments
appropriate time constant. Pacemakers have sensors that detect body motion and breathing to increase the heart
rate during exercise to meet the body’s increased needs for blood and oxygen.
FIGURE21.40(a) The lamp in this circuit ordinarily has a very high resistance, so that the battery charges the capacitor as if the lamp
were not there. When the voltage reaches a threshold value, a current flows through the lamp that dramatically reduces its resistance, and
the capacitor discharges through the lamp as if the battery and charging resistor were not there. Once discharged, the process starts again,
with the flash period determined by the constant . (b) A graph of voltage versus time for this circuit.
EXAMPLE 21.7
Calculating Time:RCCircuit in a Heart Defibrillator
A heart defibrillator is used to resuscitate an accident victim by discharging a capacitor through the trunk of her
body. A simplified version of the circuit is seen inFigure 21.38. (a) What is the time constant if an capacitor
is used and the path resistance through her body is ? (b) If the initial voltage is 10.0 kV, how long does
it take to decline to ?
Strategy
Since the resistance and capacitance are given, it is straightforward to multiply them to give the time constant asked
for in part (a). To find the time for the voltage to decline to , we repeatedly multiply the initial voltage
by 0.368 until a voltage less than or equal to is obtained. Each multiplication corresponds to a time of
seconds.
Solution for (a)
The time constant is given by the equation . Entering the given values for resistance and capacitance (and
remembering that units for a farad can be expressed as ) gives
21.84
Solution for (b)
In the first 8.00 ms, the voltage (10.0 kV) declines to 0.368 of its initial value. That is:
21.85
(Notice that we carry an extra digit for each intermediate calculation.) After another 8.00 ms, we multiply by 0.368
again, and the voltage is
21.86
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 957
21.6 • DC Circuits Containing Resistors and Capacitors 939
Similarly, after another 8.00 ms, the voltage is
′
21.87
Discussion
So after only 24.0 ms, the voltage is down to 498 V, or 4.98% of its original value.Such brief times are useful in heart
defibrillation, because the brief but intense current causes a brief but effective contraction of the heart. The actual
circuit in a heart defibrillator is slightly more complex than the one inFigure 21.38, to compensate for magnetic and
AC effects that will be covered inMagnetism.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
When is the potential difference across a capacitor an emf?
Solution
Only when the current being drawn from or put into the capacitor is zero. Capacitors, like batteries, have internal
resistance, so their output voltage is not an emf unless current is zero. This is difficult to measure in practice so we
refer to a capacitor’s voltage rather than its emf. But the source of potential difference in a capacitor is fundamental
and it is an emf.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Circuit Construction Kit (DC only)
An electronics kit in your computer! Build circuits with resistors, light bulbs, batteries, and switches. Take
measurements with the realistic ammeter and voltmeter. View the circuit as a schematic diagram, or switch to a life-
like view.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/21-6-dc-circuits-containing-resistors-
and-capacitors)
PAGE: 958
940 21 • Glossary
Glossary
ammeter an instrument that measures current energy can be transferred into or out of the circuit.
analog meter a measuring instrument that gives a Thus, the emf equals the sum of the (voltage)
readout in the form of a needle movement over a drops in the loop and can be stated:
marked gauge
bridge device a device that forms a bridge between null measurements methods of measuring current
two branches of a circuit; some bridge devices are and voltage more accurately by balancing the circuit
used to make null measurements in circuits so that no current flows through the measurement
capacitance the maximum amount of electric device
potential energy that can be stored (or separated) Ohm’s law the relationship between current, voltage,
for a given electric potential and resistance within an electrical circuit:
capacitor an electrical component used to store ohmmeter an instrument that applies a voltage to a
energy by separating electric charge on two resistance, measures the current, calculates the
opposing plates resistance using Ohm’s law, and provides a readout
conservation laws require that energy and charge be of this calculated resistance
conserved in a system parallel the wiring of resistors or other components
current the flow of charge through an electric circuit in an electrical circuit such that each component
past a given point of measurement receives an equal voltage from the power source;
current sensitivity the maximum current that a often pictured in a ladder-shaped diagram, with
galvanometer can read each component on a rung of the ladder
digital meter a measuring instrument that gives a potential difference the difference in electric
readout in a digital form potential between two points in an electric circuit,
electromotive force (emf) the potential difference of measured in volts
a source of electricity when no current is flowing; potentiometer a null measurement device for
measured in volts measuring potentials (voltages)
full-scale deflection the maximum deflection of a RC circuit a circuit that contains both a resistor and a
galvanometer needle, also known as current capacitor
sensitivity; a galvanometer with a full-scale resistance causing a loss of electrical power in a
deflection of has a maximum deflection of its circuit
needle when flows through it resistor a component that provides resistance to the
galvanometer an analog measuring device, denoted current flowing through an electrical circuit
by G, that measures current flow using a needle series a sequence of resistors or other components
deflection caused by a magnetic field force acting wired into a circuit one after the other
upon a current-carrying wire shunt resistance a small resistance placed in
internal resistance the amount of resistance within parallel with a galvanometer G to produce an
the voltage source ammeter; the larger the current to be measured, the
Joule’s law the relationship between potential smaller must be; most of the current flowing
electrical power, voltage, and resistance in an through the meter is shunted through to protect
electrical circuit, given by: the galvanometer
junction rule Kirchhoff’s first rule, which applies the terminal voltage the voltage measured across the
conservation of charge to a junction; current is the terminals of a source of potential difference
flow of charge; thus, whatever charge flows into the voltage the electrical potential energy per unit
junction must flow out; the rule can be stated charge; electric pressure created by a power source,
such as a battery
Kirchhoff’s rules a set of two rules, based on voltage drop the loss of electrical power as a current
conservation of charge and energy, governing travels through a resistor, wire or other component
current and changes in potential in an electric circuit voltmeter an instrument that measures voltage
loop rule Kirchhoff’s second rule, which states that in Wheatstone bridge a null measurement device for
a closed loop, whatever energy is supplied by emf calculating resistance by balancing potential drops
must be transferred into other forms by devices in in a circuit
the loop, since there are no other ways in which
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 959
21 • Section Summary 941
Section Summary
21.1Resistors in Series and Parallel 21.3Kirchhoff’s Rules
• The total resistance of an electrical circuit with • Kirchhoff’s rules can be used to analyze any
resistors wired in a series is the sum of the circuit, simple or complex.
individual resistances: • Kirchhoff’s first rule—the junction rule: The sum of
• Each resistor in a series circuit has the same all currents entering a junction must equal the sum
amount of current flowing through it. of all currents leaving the junction.
• The voltage drop, or power dissipation, across • Kirchhoff’s second rule—the loop rule: The
each individual resistor in a series is different, and algebraic sum of changes in potential around any
their combined total adds up to the power source closed circuit path (loop) must be zero.
input. • The two rules are based, respectively, on the laws
• The total resistance of an electrical circuit with of conservation of charge and energy.
resistors wired in parallel is less than the lowest • When calculating potential and current using
resistance of any of the components and can be Kirchhoff’s rules, a set of conventions must be
determined using the formula: followed for determining the correct signs of
various terms.
• The simpler series and parallel rules are special
• Each resistor in a parallel circuit has the same full cases of Kirchhoff’s rules.
voltage of the source applied to it.
21.4DC Voltmeters and Ammeters
• The current flowing through each resistor in a
parallel circuit is different, depending on the • Voltmeters measure voltage, and ammeters
resistance. measure current.
• If a more complex connection of resistors is a • A voltmeter is placed in parallel with the voltage
combination of series and parallel, it can be source to receive full voltage and must have a
reduced to a single equivalent resistance by large resistance to limit its effect on the circuit.
identifying its various parts as series or parallel, • An ammeter is placed in series to get the full
reducing each to its equivalent, and continuing current flowing through a branch and must have a
until a single resistance is eventually reached. small resistance to limit its effect on the circuit.
• Both can be based on the combination of a resistor
21.2Electromotive Force: Terminal Voltage
and a galvanometer, a device that gives an analog
• All voltage sources have two fundamental parts—a reading of current.
source of electrical energy that has a characteristic • Standard voltmeters and ammeters alter the
electromotive force (emf), and an internal circuit being measured and are thus limited in
resistance . accuracy.
• The emf is the potential difference of a source
21.5Null Measurements
when no current is flowing.
• The numerical value of the emf depends on the • Null measurement techniques achieve greater
source of potential difference. accuracy by balancing a circuit so that no current
• The internal resistance of a voltage source flows through the measuring device.
affects the output voltage when a current flows. • One such device, for determining voltage, is a
• The voltage output of a device is called its terminal potentiometer.
voltage and is given by , where • Another null measurement device, for determining
is the electric current and is positive when flowing resistance, is the Wheatstone bridge.
away from the positive terminal of the voltage • Other physical quantities can also be measured
source. with null measurement techniques.
• When multiple voltage sources are in series, their
21.6DC Circuits Containing Resistors and
internal resistances add and their emfs add
Capacitors
algebraically.
• Solar cells can be wired in series or parallel to • An circuit is one that has both a resistor and a
provide increased voltage or current, respectively. capacitor.
• The time constant for an circuit is .
• When an initially uncharged ( at )
PAGE: 960
942 21 • Conceptual Questions
capacitor in series with a resistor is charged by a • If a capacitor with an initial voltage is
DC voltage source, the voltage rises, discharged through a resistor starting at ,
asymptotically approaching the emf of the voltage then its voltage decreases exponentially as given
source; as a function of time, by
• Within the span of each time constant , the • In each time constant , the voltage falls by 0.368
voltage rises by 0.632 of the remaining value, of its remaining initial value, approaching zero
approaching the final voltage asymptotically. asymptotically.
Conceptual Questions
21.1Resistors in Series and Parallel 5. A student in a physics lab mistakenly wired a light
bulb, battery, and switch as shown inFigure 21.42.
1. A switch has a variable resistance that is nearly zero
Explain why the bulb is on when the switch is open,
when closed and extremely large when open, and it
and off when the switch is closed. (Do not try
is placed in series with the device it controls.
this—it is hard on the battery!)
Explain the effect the switch inFigure 21.41has on
current when open and when closed.
FIGURE21.42A wiring mistake put this switch in parallel with
the device represented by . (Note that in this diagram, the
script E represents the voltage (or electromotive force) of the
battery.)
FIGURE21.41A switch is ordinarily in series with a resistance 6. Knowing that the severity of a shock depends on
and voltage source. Ideally, the switch has nearly zero the magnitude of the current through your body,
resistance when closed but has an extremely large resistance
would you prefer to be in series or parallel with a
when open. (Note that in this diagram, the script E represents
the voltage (or electromotive force) of the battery.) resistance, such as the heating element of a toaster,
if shocked by it? Explain.
2. What is the voltage across the open switch inFigure
7. Would your headlights dim when you start your
21.41?
car’s engine if the wires in your automobile were
3. There is a voltage across an open switch, such as in
superconductors? (Do not neglect the battery’s
Figure 21.41. Why, then, is the power dissipated by
internal resistance.) Explain.
the open switch small?
8. Some strings of holiday lights are wired in series to
4. Why is the power dissipated by a closed switch,
save wiring costs. An old version utilized bulbs that
such as inFigure 21.41, small?
break the electrical connection, like an open switch,
when they burn out. If one such bulb burns out,
what happens to the others? If such a string
operates on 120 V and has 40 identical bulbs, what
is the normal operating voltage of each? Newer
versions use bulbs that short circuit, like a closed
switch, when they burn out. If one such bulb burns
out, what happens to the others? If such a string
operates on 120 V and has 39 remaining identical
bulbs, what is then the operating voltage of each?
9. If two household lightbulbs rated 60 W and 100 W
are connected in series to household power, which
will be brighter? Explain.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 961
21 • Conceptual Questions 943
10. Suppose you are doing a physics lab that asks you 21.3Kirchhoff’s Rules
to put a resistor into a circuit, but all the resistors
19. Can all of the currents going into the junction in
supplied have a larger resistance than the
Figure 21.44be positive? Explain.
requested value. How would you connect the
available resistances to attempt to get the smaller
value asked for?
11. Before World War II, some radios got power
through a “resistance cord” that had a significant
resistance. Such a resistance cord reduces the
voltage to a desired level for the radio’s tubes and
the like, and it saves the expense of a transformer.
Explain why resistance cords become warm and
FIGURE21.44
waste energy when the radio is on.
12. Some light bulbs have three power settings (not 20. Apply the junction rule to junction b inFigure
including zero), obtained from multiple filaments 21.45. Is any new information gained by applying
that are individually switched and wired in the junction rule at e? (In the figure, each emf is
parallel. What is the minimum number of represented by script E.)
filaments needed for three power settings?
21.2Electromotive Force: Terminal Voltage
13. Is every emf a potential difference? Is every
potential difference an emf? Explain.
14. Explain which battery is doing the charging and
which is being charged inFigure 21.43.
FIGURE21.45
21. (a) What is the potential difference going from
point a to point b inFigure 21.45? (b) What is the
potential difference going from c to b? (c) From e
FIGURE21.43 to g? (d) From e to d?
22. Apply the loop rule to loop afedcba inFigure
15. Given a battery, an assortment of resistors, and a
21.45.
variety of voltage and current measuring devices,
23. Apply the loop rule to loops abgefa and cbgedc in
describe how you would determine the internal
Figure 21.45.
resistance of the battery.
16. Two different 12-V automobile batteries on a store
21.4DC Voltmeters and Ammeters
shelf are rated at 600 and 850 “cold cranking
amps.” Which has the smallest internal 24. Why should you not connect an ammeter directly
resistance? across a voltage source as shown inFigure 21.46?
17. What are the advantages and disadvantages of (Note that script E in the figure stands for emf.)
connecting batteries in series? In parallel?
18. Semitractor trucks use four large 12-V batteries.
The starter system requires 24 V, while normal
operation of the truck’s other electrical
components utilizes 12 V. How could the four
batteries be connected to produce 24 V? To
produce 12 V? Why is 24 V better than 12 V for
starting the truck’s engine (a very heavy load)? FIGURE21.46
PAGE: 962
944 21 • Conceptual Questions
25. Suppose you are using a multimeter (one designed 31. The time constant in heart defibrillation is
to measure a range of voltages, currents, and crucial to limiting the time the current flows. If the
resistances) to measure current in a circuit and capacitance in the defibrillation unit is fixed, how
you inadvertently leave it in a voltmeter mode. would you manipulate resistance in the circuit to
What effect will the meter have on the circuit? adjust the constant ? Would an adjustment of
What would happen if you were measuring voltage the applied voltage also be needed to ensure that
but accidentally put the meter in the ammeter the current delivered has an appropriate value?
mode? 32. When making an ECG measurement, it is
26. Specify the points to which you could connect a important to measure voltage variations over
voltmeter to measure the following potential small time intervals. The time is limited by the
differences inFigure 21.47: (a) the potential difference constant of the circuit—it is not possible to
of the voltage source; (b) the potential difference measure time variations shorter than . How
across ; (c) across ; (d) across ; (e) across would you manipulate and in the circuit to
and . Note that there may be more than one answer allow the necessary measurements?
to each part. 33. Draw two graphs of charge versus time on a
capacitor. Draw one for charging an initially
uncharged capacitor in series with a resistor, as in
the circuit inFigure 21.37, starting from .
Draw the other for discharging a capacitor through
a resistor, as in the circuit inFigure 21.38, starting
at , with an initial charge . Show at least
two intervals of .
34. When charging a capacitor, as discussed in
conjunction withFigure 21.37, how long does it
take for the voltage on the capacitor to reach emf?
Is this a problem?
FIGURE21.47
35. When discharging a capacitor, as discussed in
27. To measure currents inFigure 21.47, you would conjunction withFigure 21.38, how long does it
replace a wire between two points with an take for the voltage on the capacitor to reach zero?
ammeter. Specify the points between which you Is this a problem?
would place an ammeter to measure the 36. Referring toFigure 21.37, draw a graph of
following: (a) the total current; (b) the current potential difference across the resistor versus
flowing through ; (c) through ; (d) through time, showing at least two intervals of . Also draw
. Note that there may be more than one answer a graph of current versus time for this situation.
to each part. 37. A long, inexpensive extension cord is connected
from inside the house to a refrigerator outside.
21.5Null Measurements The refrigerator doesn’t run as it should. What
might be the problem?
28. Why can a null measurement be more accurate
38. InFigure 21.40, does the graph indicate the time
than one using standard voltmeters and
constant is shorter for discharging than for
ammeters? What factors limit the accuracy of null
charging? Would you expect ionized gas to have
measurements?
low resistance? How would you adjust to get a
29. If a potentiometer is used to measure cell emfs on
longer time between flashes? Would adjusting
the order of a few volts, why is it most accurate for
affect the discharge time?
the standard to be the same order of
magnitude and the resistances to be in the range
of a few ohms?
21.6DC Circuits Containing Resistors and
Capacitors
30. Regarding the units involved in the relationship
, verify that the units of resistance times
capacitance are time, that is, .
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 963
21 • Problems & Exercises 945
39. An electronic apparatus may have large capacitors
at high voltage in the power supply section,
presenting a shock hazard even when the
apparatus is switched off. A “bleeder resistor” is
therefore placed across such a capacitor, as
shown schematically inFigure 21.48, to bleed the
charge from it after the apparatus is off. Why must
the bleeder resistance be much greater than the
effective resistance of the rest of the circuit? How
does this affect the time constant for discharging
the capacitor?
FIGURE21.48A bleeder resistor discharges the
capacitor in this electronic device once it is switched off.
Problems & Exercises
21.1Resistors in Series and Parallel 7. Referring to the example combining series and
parallel circuits andFigure 21.6, calculate in the
Note: Data taken from figures can be assumed to be
following two different ways: (a) from the known
accurate to three significant digits.
values of and ; (b) using Ohm’s law for . In
1. (a) What is the resistance of ten resistors both parts explicitly show how you follow the steps
connected in series? (b) In parallel? in theProblem-Solving Strategies for Series and
2. (a) What is the resistance of a , a Parallel Resistors.
, and a resistor connected in 8. Referring toFigure 21.6: (a) Calculate and note
series? (b) In parallel? how it compares with found in the first two
3. What are the largest and smallest resistances you example problems in this module. (b) Find the total
can obtain by connecting a , a , and a power supplied by the source and compare it with
resistor together? the sum of the powers dissipated by the resistors.
4. An 1800-W toaster, a 1400-W electric frying pan, 9. Refer toFigure 21.7and the discussion of lights
and a 75-W lamp are plugged into the same outlet dimming when a heavy appliance comes on. (a)
in a 15-A, 120-V circuit. (The three devices are in Given the voltage source is 120 V, the wire
parallel when plugged into the same socket.). (a) resistance is , and the bulb is nominally
What current is drawn by each device? (b) Will this 75.0 W, what power will the bulb dissipate if a total
combination blow the 15-A fuse? of 15.0 A passes through the wires when the motor
5. Your car’s 30.0-W headlight and 2.40-kW starter comes on? Assume negligible change in bulb
are ordinarily connected in parallel in a 12.0-V resistance. (b) What power is consumed by the
system. What power would one headlight and the motor?
starter consume if connected in series to a 12.0-V
battery? (Neglect any other resistance in the circuit
and any change in resistance in the two devices.)
6. (a) Given a 48.0-V battery and and
resistors, find the current and power for each when
connected in series. (b) Repeat when the
resistances are in parallel.
PAGE: 964
946 21 • Problems & Exercises
10. A 240-kV power transmission line carrying 15. Carbon-zinc dry cells (sometimes referred to as
is hung from grounded metal towers non-alkaline cells) have an emf of 1.54 V, and they
by ceramic insulators, each having a are produced as single cells or in various
× resistance.Figure 21.49. (a) What combinations to form other voltages. (a) How
many 1.54-V cells are needed to make the
is the resistance to ground of 100 of these
common 9-V battery used in many small
insulators? (b) Calculate the power dissipated by
electronic devices? (b) What is the actual emf of
100 of them. (c) What fraction of the power
the approximately 9-V battery? (c) Discuss how
carried by the line is this? Explicitly show how you
internal resistance in the series connection of cells
follow the steps in theProblem-Solving Strategies
will affect the terminal voltage of this
for Series and Parallel Resistors.
approximately 9-V battery.
16. What is the output voltage of a 3.0000-V lithium
cell in a digital wristwatch that draws 0.300 mA, if
the cell’s internal resistance is ?
17. (a) What is the terminal voltage of a large 1.54-V
carbon-zinc dry cell used in a physics lab to supply
2.00 A to a circuit, if the cell’s internal resistance
is ? (b) How much electrical power does
the cell produce? (c) What power goes to its load?
18. What is the internal resistance of an automobile
battery that has an emf of 12.0 V and a terminal
voltage of 15.0 V while a current of 8.00 A is
charging it?
19. (a) Find the terminal voltage of a 12.0-V
FIGURE21.49High-voltage (240-kV) transmission line motorcycle battery having a internal
carrying is hung from a grounded metal
resistance, if it is being charged by a current of
transmission tower. The row of ceramic insulators provide
of resistance each. 10.0 A. (b) What is the output voltage of the
battery charger?
11. Show that if two resistors and are
20. A car battery with a 12-V emf and an internal
combined and one is much greater than the other
resistance of is being charged with a
( ): (a) Their series resistance is very
current of 60 A. Note that in this process the
nearly equal to the greater resistance . (b)
battery is being charged. (a) What is the potential
Their parallel resistance is very nearly equal to
difference across its terminals? (b) At what rate is
smaller resistance .
thermal energy being dissipated in the battery? (c)
12. Unreasonable Results
At what rate is electric energy being converted to
Two resistors, one having a resistance of ,
chemical energy? (d) What are the answers to (a)
are connected in parallel to produce a total
and (b) when the battery is used to supply 60 A to
resistance of . (a) What is the value of the
the starter motor?
second resistance? (b) What is unreasonable
21. The hot resistance of a flashlight bulb is ,
about this result? (c) Which assumptions are
and it is run by a 1.58-V alkaline cell having a
unreasonable or inconsistent?
internal resistance. (a) What current
13. Unreasonable Results
flows? (b) Calculate the power supplied to the
Two resistors, one having a resistance of ,
bulb using . (c) Is this power the same as
are connected in series to produce a total
resistance of . (a) What is the value of calculated using ?
the second resistance? (b) What is unreasonable
about this result? (c) Which assumptions are
unreasonable or inconsistent?
21.2Electromotive Force: Terminal Voltage
14. Standard automobile batteries have six lead-acid
cells in series, creating a total emf of 12.0 V. What
is the emf of an individual lead-acid cell?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 965
21 • Problems & Exercises 947
22. The label on a portable radio recommends the use 27. Electric fish generate current with biological cells
of rechargeable nickel-cadmium cells (nicads), called electroplaques, which are physiological emf
although they have a 1.25-V emf while alkaline devices. The electroplaques in the South
cells have a 1.58-V emf. The radio has a American eel are arranged in 140 rows, each row
resistance. (a) Draw a circuit diagram of the radio stretching horizontally along the body and each
and its batteries. Now, calculate the power containing 5000 electroplaques. Each
delivered to the radio. (b) When using Nicad cells electroplaque has an emf of 0.15 V and internal
each having an internal resistance of . (c) resistance of . If the water surrounding the
When using alkaline cells each having an internal fish has resistance of , how much current
resistance of . (d) Does this difference can the eel produce in water from near its head to
seem significant, considering that the radio’s near its tail?
effective resistance is lowered when its volume is 28. Integrated Concepts
turned up? A 12.0-V emf automobile battery has a terminal
23. An automobile starter motor has an equivalent voltage of 16.0 V when being charged by a current
resistance of and is supplied by a 12.0-V of 10.0 A. (a) What is the battery’s internal
battery with a internal resistance. (a) resistance? (b) What power is dissipated inside
What is the current to the motor? (b) What voltage the battery? (c) At what rate (in ) will its
is applied to it? (c) What power is supplied to the temperature increase if its mass is 20.0 kg and it
motor? (d) Repeat these calculations for when the has a specific heat of ,
battery connections are corroded and add assuming no heat escapes?
to the circuit. (Significant problems are 29. Unreasonable Results
caused by even small amounts of unwanted A 1.58-V alkaline cell with a internal
resistance in low-voltage, high-current resistance is supplying 8.50 A to a load. (a) What
applications.) is its terminal voltage? (b) What is the value of the
24. A child’s electronic toy is supplied by three 1.58-V load resistance? (c) What is unreasonable about
alkaline cells having internal resistances of these results? (d) Which assumptions are
in series with a 1.53-V carbon-zinc dry unreasonable or inconsistent?
cell having a internal resistance. The load 30. Unreasonable Results
resistance is . (a) Draw a circuit diagram of (a) What is the internal resistance of a 1.54-V dry
the toy and its batteries. (b) What current flows? cell that supplies 1.00 W of power to a
(c) How much power is supplied to the load? (d) bulb? (b) What is unreasonable about this result?
What is the internal resistance of the dry cell if it (c) Which assumptions are unreasonable or
goes bad, resulting in only 0.500 W being supplied inconsistent?
to the load?
25. (a) What is the internal resistance of a voltage 21.3Kirchhoff’s Rules
source if its terminal voltage drops by 2.00 V when
31. Apply the loop rule to loop abcdefgha inFigure
the current supplied increases by 5.00 A? (b) Can
21.25.
the emf of the voltage source be found with the
32. Apply the loop rule to loop aedcba inFigure 21.25.
information supplied?
33. Verify the second equation inExample 21.5by
26. A person with body resistance between his hands
substituting the values found for the currents
of accidentally grasps the terminals of a
and .
20.0-kV power supply. (Do NOT do this!) (a) Draw
34. Verify the third equation inExample 21.5by
a circuit diagram to represent the situation. (b) If
substituting the values found for the currents
the internal resistance of the power supply is
and .
, what is the current through his body? (c)
What is the power dissipated in his body? (d) If the
power supply is to be made safe by increasing its
internal resistance, what should the internal
resistance be for the maximum current in this
situation to be 1.00 mA or less? (e) Will this
modification compromise the effectiveness of the
power supply for driving low-resistance devices?
Explain your reasoning.
PAGE: 966
948 21 • Problems & Exercises
35. Apply the junction rule at point a inFigure 21.50. 21.4DC Voltmeters and Ammeters
42. What is the sensitivity of the galvanometer (that is,
what current gives a full-scale deflection) inside a
voltmeter that has a resistance on its
30.0-V scale?
43. What is the sensitivity of the galvanometer (that is,
what current gives a full-scale deflection) inside a
voltmeter that has a resistance on its
100-V scale?
44. Find the resistance that must be placed in series
with a galvanometer having a
sensitivity (the same as the one discussed in the
text) to allow it to be used as a voltmeter with a
0.100-V full-scale reading.
FIGURE21.50
45. Find the resistance that must be placed in series
36. Apply the loop rule to loop abcdefghija inFigure
with a galvanometer having a
21.50.
sensitivity (the same as the one discussed in the
37. Apply the loop rule to loop akledcba inFigure
text) to allow it to be used as a voltmeter with a
21.50.
3000-V full-scale reading. Include a circuit
38. Find the currents flowing in the circuit inFigure
diagram with your solution.
21.50. Explicitly show how you follow the steps in
46. Find the resistance that must be placed in parallel
theProblem-Solving Strategies for Series and
with a galvanometer having a
Parallel Resistors.
sensitivity (the same as the one discussed in the
39. SolveExample 21.5, but use loop abcdefgha
text) to allow it to be used as an ammeter with a
instead of loop akledcba. Explicitly show how you
10.0-A full-scale reading. Include a circuit
follow the steps in theProblem-Solving Strategies
diagram with your solution.
for Series and Parallel Resistors.
47. Find the resistance that must be placed in parallel
40. Find the currents flowing in the circuit inFigure
with a galvanometer having a
21.45.
sensitivity (the same as the one discussed in the
41. Unreasonable Results
text) to allow it to be used as an ammeter with a
Consider the circuit inFigure 21.51, and suppose
300-mA full-scale reading.
that the emfs are unknown and the currents are
48. Find the resistance that must be placed in series
given to be , , and
with a galvanometer having a
. (a) Could you find the emfs? (b)
sensitivity to allow it to be used as a voltmeter
What is wrong with the assumptions?
with: (a) a 300-V full-scale reading, and (b) a
0.300-V full-scale reading.
49. Find the resistance that must be placed in parallel
with a galvanometer having a
sensitivity to allow it to be used as an ammeter
with: (a) a 20.0-A full-scale reading, and (b) a
100-mA full-scale reading.
FIGURE21.51
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 967
21 • Problems & Exercises 949
50. Suppose you measure the terminal voltage of a 55. Unreasonable Results
1.585-V alkaline cell having an internal resistance Suppose you have a galvanometer with a
of by placing a voltmeter across sensitivity. (a) What resistance would you
its terminals. (SeeFigure 21.52.) (a) What current put in series with it to allow it to be used as a
flows? (b) Find the terminal voltage. (c) To see voltmeter that has a full-scale deflection for 0.500
how close the measured terminal voltage is to the mV? (b) What is unreasonable about this result?
emf, calculate their ratio. (c) Which assumptions are responsible?
56. Unreasonable Results
(a) What resistance would you put in parallel with
a galvanometer having a
sensitivity to allow it to be used as an ammeter
that has a full-scale deflection for ? (b)
What is unreasonable about this result? (c) Which
FIGURE21.52 assumptions are responsible?
51. Suppose you measure the terminal voltage of a
21.5Null Measurements
3.200-V lithium cell having an internal resistance
of by placing a voltmeter across 57. What is the of a cell being measured in a
its terminals. (a) What current flows? (b) Find the potentiometer, if the standard cell’s emf is 12.0 V
terminal voltage. (c) To see how close the and the potentiometer balances for
measured terminal voltage is to the emf, calculate and ?
their ratio. 58. Calculate the of a dry cell for which a
52. A certain ammeter has a resistance of potentiometer is balanced when ,
× on its 3.00-A scale and contains a while an alkaline standard cell with an emf of
galvanometer. What is the sensitivity of 1.600 V requires to balance the
the galvanometer? potentiometer.
53. A voltmeter is placed in parallel with a 59. When an unknown resistance is placed in a
resistor in a circuit. (a) Draw a circuit Wheatstone bridge, it is possible to balance the
diagram of the connection. (b) What is the bridge by adjusting to be . What is
resistance of the combination? (c) If the voltage if ?
across the combination is kept the same as it was
60. To what value must you adjust to balance a
across the resistor alone, what is the
Wheatstone bridge, if the unknown resistance
percent increase in current? (d) If the current
is , is , and is ?
through the combination is kept the same as it
61. (a) What is the unknown in a potentiometer
was through the resistor alone, what is
that balances when is , and balances
the percentage decrease in voltage? (e) Are the
when is for a standard 3.000-V emf? (b)
changes found in parts (c) and (d) significant?
The same is placed in the same
Discuss.
potentiometer, which now balances when is
54. A ammeter is placed in series with a
for a standard emf of 3.100 V. At what
resistor in a circuit. (a) Draw a circuit
resistance will the potentiometer balance?
diagram of the connection. (b) Calculate the
62. Suppose you want to measure resistances in the
resistance of the combination. (c) If the voltage is
range from to using a Wheatstone
kept the same across the combination as it was
bridge that has . Over what range
through the resistor alone, what is the
percent decrease in current? (d) If the current is should be adjustable?
kept the same through the combination as it was
through the resistor alone, what is the 21.6DC Circuits Containing Resistors and
percent increase in voltage? (e) Are the changes Capacitors
found in parts (c) and (d) significant? Discuss.
63. The timing device in an automobile’s intermittent
wiper system is based on an time constant
and utilizes a capacitor and a variable
resistor. Over what range must be made to vary
to achieve time constants from 2.00 to 15.0 s?
PAGE: 968
950 21 • Problems & Exercises
64. A heart pacemaker fires 72 times a minute, each 71. Figure 21.53shows how a bleeder resistor is used
time a 25.0-nF capacitor is charged (by a battery to discharge a capacitor after an electronic device
in series with a resistor) to 0.632 of its full voltage. is shut off, allowing a person to work on the
What is the value of the resistance? electronics with less risk of shock. (a) What is the
65. The duration of a photographic flash is related to time constant? (b) How long will it take to reduce
an time constant, which is for a the voltage on the capacitor to 0.250% (5% of
certain camera. (a) If the resistance of the flash 5%) of its full value once discharge begins? (c) If
lamp is during discharge, what is the the capacitor is charged to a voltage through a
size of the capacitor supplying its energy? (b) resistance, calculate the time it takes to
What is the time constant for charging the rise to (This is about two time constants.)
capacitor, if the charging resistance is ?
66. A 2.00- and a capacitor can be connected
in series or parallel, as can a 25.0- and a
resistor. Calculate the four time constants
possible from connecting the resulting
capacitance and resistance in series.
67. After two time constants, what percentage of the
final voltage, emf, is on an initially uncharged
capacitor , charged through a resistance ?
FIGURE21.53
68. A resistor, an uncharged capacitor,
and a 6.16-V emf are connected in series. (a) What 72. Using the exact exponential treatment, find how
is the initial current? (b) What is the time much time is required to discharge a
constant? (c) What is the current after one time capacitor through a resistor down to 1.00%
constant? (d) What is the voltage on the capacitor of its original voltage.
after one time constant? 73. Using the exact exponential treatment, find how
69. A heart defibrillator being used on a patient has an much time is required to charge an initially
time constant of 10.0 ms due to the uncharged 100-pF capacitor through a
resistance of the patient and the capacitance of resistor to 90.0% of its final voltage.
the defibrillator. (a) If the defibrillator has an 74. Integrated Concepts
capacitance, what is the resistance of the If you wish to take a picture of a bullet traveling at
path through the patient? (You may neglect the 500 m/s, then a very brief flash of light produced
capacitance of the patient and the resistance of by an discharge through a flash tube can limit
the defibrillator.) (b) If the initial voltage is 12.0 blurring. Assuming 1.00 mm of motion during one
kV, how long does it take to decline to constant is acceptable, and given that the
? flash is driven by a capacitor, what is the
70. An ECG monitor must have an time constant resistance in the flash tube?
less than to be able to measure 75. Integrated Concepts
variations in voltage over small time intervals. (a) A flashing lamp in a Christmas earring is based on
If the resistance of the circuit (due mostly to that an discharge of a capacitor through its
of the patient’s chest) is , what is the resistance. The effective duration of the flash is
maximum capacitance of the circuit? (b) Would it 0.250 s, during which it produces an average
be difficult in practice to limit the capacitance to 0.500 W from an average 3.00 V. (a) What energy
less than the value found in (a)? does it dissipate? (b) How much charge moves
through the lamp? (c) Find the capacitance. (d)
What is the resistance of the lamp?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 969
21 • Problems & Exercises 951
76. Integrated Concepts 79. Construct Your Own Problem
A capacitor charged to 450 V is Consider a rechargeable lithium cell that is to be
discharged through a resistor. (a) Find used to power a camcorder. Construct a problem
the time constant. (b) Calculate the temperature in which you calculate the internal resistance of
increase of the resistor, given that its mass is 2.50 the cell during normal operation. Also, calculate
g and its specific heat is , noting that the minimum voltage output of a battery charger
to be used to recharge your lithium cell. Among
most of the thermal energy is retained in the short
the things to be considered are the emf and useful
time of the discharge. (c) Calculate the new
terminal voltage of a lithium cell and the current it
resistance, assuming it is pure carbon. (d) Does
should be able to supply to a camcorder.
this change in resistance seem significant?
80. Critical ThinkingA circuit has a voltage source
77. Unreasonable Results
producing and a
(a) Calculate the capacitance needed to get an
resistor. (a) If the circuit contains nothing else,
time constant of with a
how much power is dissipated by the resistor? (b)
resistor. (b) What is unreasonable about this
A second resistor is added in parallel
result? (c) Which assumptions are responsible?
to the first resistor. Now how much power is
78. Construct Your Own Problem
dissipated by the resistors? (c) Now place the two
Consider a camera’s flash unit. Construct a
resistors in series. How much power is dissipated
problem in which you calculate the size of the
by the resistors? (d) Why would a parallel
capacitor that stores energy for the flash lamp.
arrangement of resistors dissipate more power
Among the things to be considered are the voltage
than a series arrangement of resistors of the same
applied to the capacitor, the energy needed in the
value? (e) Which delivers more energy in a given
flash and the associated charge needed on the
time period, the parallel combination of resistors,
capacitor, the resistance of the flash lamp during
the series combination of resistors, or is the
discharge, and the desired time constant.
energy delivered in a given time period the same?
PAGE: 970
952 21 • Problems & Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 971
CHAPTER 22
Magnetism
FIGURE22.1The magnificent spectacle of the Aurora Borealis, or northern lights, glows in the northern sky above Bear Lake near Eielson
Air Force Base, Alaska. Shaped by the Earth’s magnetic field, this light is produced by radiation spewed from solar storms. (credit: Senior
Airman Joshua Strang, via Flickr)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
22.1Magnets
22.2Ferromagnets and Electromagnets
22.3Magnetic Fields and Magnetic Field Lines
22.4Magnetic Field Strength: Force on a Moving Charge in a Magnetic Field
22.5Force on a Moving Charge in a Magnetic Field: Examples and Applications
22.6The Hall Effect
22.7Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying Conductor
22.8Torque on a Current Loop: Motors and Meters
22.9Magnetic Fields Produced by Currents: Ampere’s Law
22.10Magnetic Force between Two Parallel Conductors
22.11More Applications of Magnetism
INTRODUCTION TO MAGNETISM One evening, an Alaskan sticks a note to his refrigerator with a small magnet.
Through the kitchen window, the Aurora Borealis glows in the night sky. This grand spectacle is shaped by the same
force that holds the note to the refrigerator.
People have been aware of magnets and magnetism for thousands of years. The earliest records date to well before
the time of Christ, particularly in a region of Asia Minor called Magnesia (the name of this region is the source of
words likemagnetic). Magnetic rocks found in Magnesia, which is now part of western Turkey, stimulated interest
during ancient times. A practical application for magnets was found later, when they were employed as navigational
compasses. The use of magnets in compasses resulted not only in improved long-distance sailing, but also in the
names of “north” and “south” being given to the two types of magnetic poles.
PAGE: 972
954 22 • Magnetism
Today magnetism plays many important roles in our lives. Physicists’ understanding of magnetism has enabled the
development of technologies that affect our everyday lives. The iPod in your purse or backpack, for example,
wouldn’t have been possible without the applications of magnetism and electricity on a small scale.
The discovery that weak changes in a magnetic field in a thin film of iron and chromium could bring about much
larger changes in electrical resistance was one of the first large successes of nanotechnology. The 2007 Nobel Prize
in Physics went to Albert Fert from France and Peter Grunberg from Germany for this discovery ofgiant
magnetoresistanceand its applications to computer memory.
All electric motors, with uses as diverse as powering refrigerators, starting cars, and moving elevators, contain
magnets. Generators, whether producing hydroelectric power or running bicycle lights, use magnetic fields.
Recycling facilities employ magnets to separate iron from other refuse. Hundreds of millions of dollars are spent
annually on magnetic containment of fusion as a future energy source. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has
become an important diagnostic tool in the field of medicine, and the use of magnetism to explore brain activity is a
subject of contemporary research and development. The list of applications also includes computer hard drives,
tape recording, detection of inhaled asbestos, and levitation of high-speed trains. Magnetism is used to explain
atomic energy levels, cosmic rays, and charged particles trapped in the Van Allen belts. Once again, we will find all
these disparate phenomena are linked by a small number of underlying physical principles.
FIGURE22.2Engineering of technology like iPods would not be possible without a deep understanding magnetism. (credit: Jesse! S?,
Flickr)
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/22-introduction-to-magnetism)
22.1 Magnets
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the difference between the north and south poles of a magnet.
• Describe how magnetic poles interact with each other.
FIGURE22.3Magnets come in various shapes, sizes, and strengths. All have both a north pole and a south pole. There is never an isolated
pole (a monopole).
All magnets attract iron, such as that in a refrigerator door. However, magnets may attract or repel other magnets.
Experimentation shows that all magnets have two poles. If freely suspended, one pole will point toward the north.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 973
22.1 • Magnets 955
The two poles are thus named thenorth magnetic poleand thesouth magnetic pole(or more properly, north-
seeking and south-seeking poles, for the attractions in those directions).
Universal Characteristics of Magnets and Magnetic Poles
It is a universal characteristic of all magnets thatlike poles repel and unlike poles attract. (Note the similarity
with electrostatics: unlike charges attract and like charges repel.)
Further experimentation shows that it isimpossible to separate north and south polesin the manner that + and
− charges can be separated.
FIGURE22.4One end of a bar magnet is suspended from a thread that points toward north. The magnet’s two poles are labeled N and S for
north-seeking and south-seeking poles, respectively.
Misconception Alert: Earth’s Magnetic Poles
Earth acts like a very large bar magnet with its south-seeking pole near the geographic North Pole. That is why
the north pole of your compass is attracted toward the geographic north pole of Earth—because the magnetic
pole that is near the geographic North Pole is actually a south magnetic pole! Confusion arises because the
geographic term “North Pole” has come to be used (incorrectly) for the magnetic pole that is near the North
Pole. Thus, “north magnetic pole” is actually a misnomer—it should be called the south magnetic pole.
FIGURE22.5Unlike poles attract, whereas like poles repel.
PAGE: 974
956 22 • Magnetism
FIGURE22.6North and south poles always occur in pairs. Attempts to separate them result in more pairs of poles. If we continue to split
the magnet, we will eventually get down to an iron atom with a north pole and a south pole—these, too, cannot be separated.
The fact that magnetic poles always occur in pairs of north and south is true from the very large scale—for example,
sunspots always occur in pairs that are north and south magnetic poles—all the way down to the very small scale.
Magnetic atoms have both a north pole and a south pole, as do many types of subatomic particles, such as
electrons, protons, and neutrons.
Making Connections: Take-Home Experiment—Refrigerator Magnets
We know that like magnetic poles repel and unlike poles attract. See if you can show this for two refrigerator
magnets. Will the magnets stick if you turn them over? Why do they stick to the door anyway? What can you say
about the magnetic properties of the door next to the magnet? Do refrigerator magnets stick to metal or plastic
spoons? Do they stick to all types of metal?
22.2 Ferromagnets and Electromagnets
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define ferromagnet.
• Describe the role of magnetic domains in magnetization.
• Explain the significance of the Curie temperature.
• Describe the relationship between electricity and magnetism.
Ferromagnets
Only certain materials, such as iron, cobalt, nickel, and gadolinium, exhibit strong magnetic effects. Such materials
are calledferromagnetic, after the Latin word for iron,ferrum. A group of materials made from the alloys of the rare
earth elements are also used as strong and permanent magnets; a popular one is neodymium. Other materials
exhibit weak magnetic effects, which are detectable only with sensitive instruments. Not only do ferromagnetic
materials respond strongly to magnets (the way iron is attracted to magnets), they can also bemagnetized
themselves—that is, they can be induced to be magnetic or made into permanent magnets.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 975
22.2 • Ferromagnets and Electromagnets 957
FIGURE22.7An unmagnetized piece of iron is placed between two magnets, heated, and then cooled, or simply tapped when cold. The
iron becomes a permanent magnet with the poles aligned as shown: its south pole is adjacent to the north pole of the original magnet, and
its north pole is adjacent to the south pole of the original magnet. Note that there are attractive forces between the magnets.
When a magnet is brought near a previously unmagnetized ferromagnetic material, it causes local magnetization of
the material with unlike poles closest, as inFigure 22.7. (This results in the attraction of the previously
unmagnetized material to the magnet.) What happens on a microscopic scale is illustrated inFigure 22.8. The
regions within the material calleddomainsact like small bar magnets. Within domains, the poles of individual atoms
are aligned. Each atom acts like a tiny bar magnet. Domains are small and randomly oriented in an unmagnetized
ferromagnetic object. In response to an external magnetic field, the domains may grow to millimeter size, aligning
themselves as shown inFigure 22.8(b). This induced magnetization can be made permanent if the material is
heated and then cooled, or simply tapped in the presence of other magnets.
FIGURE22.8(a) An unmagnetized piece of iron (or other ferromagnetic material) has randomly oriented domains. (b) When magnetized by
an external field, the domains show greater alignment, and some grow at the expense of others. Individual atoms are aligned within
domains; each atom acts like a tiny bar magnet.
Conversely, a permanent magnet can be demagnetized by hard blows or by heating it in the absence of another
magnet. Increased thermal motion at higher temperature can disrupt and randomize the orientation and the size of
the domains. There is a well-defined temperature for ferromagnetic materials, which is called theCurie
temperature, above which they cannot be magnetized. The Curie temperature for iron is 1043 K , which is
well above room temperature. There are several elements and alloys that have Curie temperatures much lower than
room temperature and are ferromagnetic only below those temperatures.
Electromagnets
Early in the 19th century, it was discovered that electrical currents cause magnetic effects. The first significant
observation was by the Danish scientist Hans Christian Oersted (1777–1851), who found that a compass needle
was deflected by a current-carrying wire. This was the first significant evidence that the movement of charges had
any connection with magnets.Electromagnetismis the use of electric current to make magnets. These temporarily
induced magnets are calledelectromagnets. Electromagnets are employed for everything from a wrecking yard
crane that lifts scrapped cars to controlling the beam of a 90-km-circumference particle accelerator to the magnets
in medical imaging machines (SeeFigure 22.9).
PAGE: 976
958 22 • Magnetism
FIGURE22.9Instrument for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The device uses a superconducting cylindrical coil for the main magnetic
field. The patient goes into this “tunnel” on the gurney. (credit: Bill McChesney, Flickr)
Figure 22.10shows that the response of iron filings to a current-carrying coil and to a permanent bar magnet. The
patterns are similar. In fact, electromagnets and ferromagnets have the same basic characteristics—for example,
they have north and south poles that cannot be separated and for which like poles repel and unlike poles attract.
FIGURE22.10Iron filings near (a) a current-carrying coil and (b) a magnet act like tiny compass needles, showing the shape of their fields.
Their response to a current-carrying coil and a permanent magnet is seen to be very similar, especially near the ends of the coil and the
magnet.
Combining a ferromagnet with an electromagnet can produce particularly strong magnetic effects. (SeeFigure
22.11.) Whenever strong magnetic effects are needed, such as lifting scrap metal, or in particle accelerators,
electromagnets are enhanced by ferromagnetic materials. Limits to how strong the magnets can be made are
imposed by coil resistance (it will overheat and melt at sufficiently high current), and so superconducting magnets
may be employed. These are still limited, because superconducting properties are destroyed by too great a
magnetic field.
FIGURE22.11An electromagnet with a ferromagnetic core can produce very strong magnetic effects. Alignment of domains in the core
produces a magnet, the poles of which are aligned with the electromagnet.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 977
22.2 • Ferromagnets and Electromagnets 959
Figure 22.12shows a few uses of combinations of electromagnets and ferromagnets. Ferromagnetic materials can
act as memory devices, because the orientation of the magnetic fields of small domains can be reversed or erased.
Magnetic information storage on videotapes and computer hard drives are among the most common applications.
This property is vital in our digital world.
FIGURE22.12An electromagnet induces regions of permanent magnetism on a floppy disk coated with a ferromagnetic material. The
information stored here is digital (a region is either magnetic or not); in other applications, it can be analog (with a varying strength), such as
on audiotapes.
Current: The Source of All Magnetism
An electromagnet creates magnetism with an electric current. In later sections we explore this more quantitatively,
finding the strength and direction of magnetic fields created by various currents. But what about ferromagnets?
Figure 22.13shows models of how electric currents create magnetism at the submicroscopic level. (Note that we
cannot directly observe the paths of individual electrons about atoms, and so a model or visual image, consistent
with all direct observations, is made. We can directly observe the electron’s orbital angular momentum, its spin
momentum, and subsequent magnetic moments, all of which are explained with electric-current-creating
subatomic magnetism.) Currents, including those associated with other submicroscopic particles like protons, allow
us to explain ferromagnetism and all other magnetic effects. Ferromagnetism, for example, results from an internal
cooperative alignment of electron spins, possible in some materials but not in others.
Crucial to the statement that electric current is the source of all magnetism is the fact that it is impossible to
separate north and south magnetic poles. (This is far different from the case of positive and negative charges, which
are easily separated.) A current loop always produces a magnetic dipole—that is, a magnetic field that acts like a
north pole and south pole pair. Since isolated north and south magnetic poles, calledmagnetic monopoles, are not
observed, currents are used to explain all magnetic effects. If magnetic monopoles did exist, then we would have to
modify this underlying connection that all magnetism is due to electrical current. There is no known reason that
magnetic monopoles should not exist—they are simply never observed—and so searches at the subnuclear level
continue. If they donotexist, we would like to find out why not. If theydoexist, we would like to see evidence of
them.
PAGE: 978
960 22 • Magnetism
Electric Currents and Magnetism
Electric current is the source of all magnetism.
FIGURE22.13(a) In the planetary model of the atom, an electron orbits a nucleus, forming a closed-current loop and producing a magnetic
field with a north pole and a south pole. (b) Electrons have spin and can be crudely pictured as rotating charge, forming a current that
produces a magnetic field with a north pole and a south pole. Neither the planetary model nor the image of a spinning electron is
completely consistent with modern physics. However, they do provide a useful way of understanding phenomena.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Magnets and Electromagnets
Explore the interactions between a compass and bar magnet. Discover how you can use a battery and wire to make
a magnet! Can you make it a stronger magnet? Can you make the magnetic field reverse?
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/l/28elec_magnet).
22.3 Magnetic Fields and Magnetic Field Lines
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define magnetic field and describe the magnetic field lines of various magnetic fields.
Einstein is said to have been fascinated by a compass as a child, perhaps musing on how the needle felt a force
without direct physical contact. His ability to think deeply and clearly about action at a distance, particularly for
gravitational, electric, and magnetic forces, later enabled him to create his revolutionary theory of relativity. Since
magnetic forces act at a distance, we define amagnetic fieldto represent magnetic forces. The pictorial
representation ofmagnetic field linesis very useful in visualizing the strength and direction of the magnetic field.
As shown inFigure 22.14, thedirection of magnetic field linesis defined to be the direction in which the north end
of a compass needle points. The magnetic field is traditionally called theB-field.
FIGURE22.14Magnetic field lines are defined to have the direction that a small compass points when placed at a location. (a) If small
compasses are used to map the magnetic field around a bar magnet, they will point in the directions shown: away from the north pole of the
magnet, toward the south pole of the magnet. (Recall that the Earth’s north magnetic pole is really a south pole in terms of definitions of
poles on a bar magnet.) (b) Connecting the arrows gives continuous magnetic field lines. The strength of the field is proportional to the
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 979
22.4 • Magnetic Field Strength: Force on a Moving Charge in a Magnetic Field 961
closeness (or density) of the lines. (c) If the interior of the magnet could be probed, the field lines would be found to form continuous
closed loops.
Small compasses used to test a magnetic field will not disturb it. (This is analogous to the way we tested electric
fields with a small test charge. In both cases, the fields represent only the object creating them and not the probe
testing them.)Figure 22.15shows how the magnetic field appears for a current loop and a long straight wire, as
could be explored with small compasses. A small compass placed in these fields will align itself parallel to the field
line at its location, with its north pole pointing in the direction ofB. Note the symbols used for field into and out of
the paper.
FIGURE22.15Small compasses could be used to map the fields shown here. (a) The magnetic field of a circular current loop is similar to
that of a bar magnet. (b) A long and straight wire creates a field with magnetic field lines forming circular loops. (c) When the wire is in the
plane of the paper, the field is perpendicular to the paper. Note that the symbols used for the field pointing inward (like the tail of an arrow)
and the field pointing outward (like the tip of an arrow).
Making Connections: Concept of a Field
A field is a way of mapping forces surrounding any object that can act on another object at a distance without
apparent physical connection. The field represents the object generating it. Gravitational fields map gravitational
forces, electric fields map electrical forces, and magnetic fields map magnetic forces.
Extensive exploration of magnetic fields has revealed a number of hard-and-fast rules. We use magnetic field lines
to represent the field (the lines are a pictorial tool, not a physical entity in and of themselves). The properties of
magnetic field lines can be summarized by these rules:
1. The direction of the magnetic field is tangent to the field line at any point in space. A small compass will point in
the direction of the field line.
2. The strength of the field is proportional to the closeness of the lines. It is exactly proportional to the number of
lines per unit area perpendicular to the lines (called the areal density).
3. Magnetic field lines can never cross, meaning that the field is unique at any point in space.
4. Magnetic field lines are continuous, forming closed loops without beginning or end. They go from the north pole
to the south pole.
The last property is related to the fact that the north and south poles cannot be separated. It is a distinct difference
from electric field lines, which begin and end on the positive and negative charges. If magnetic monopoles existed,
then magnetic field lines would begin and end on them.
22.4 Magnetic Field Strength: Force on a Moving Charge in a Magnetic Field
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the effects of magnetic fields on moving charges.
• Use the right hand rule 1 to determine the velocity of a charge, the direction of the magnetic field, and the
direction of the magnetic force on a moving charge.
• Calculate the magnetic force on a moving charge.
What is the mechanism by which one magnet exerts a force on another? The answer is related to the fact that all
magnetism is caused by current, the flow of charge.Magnetic fields exert forces on moving charges, and so they
PAGE: 980
962 22 • Magnetism
exert forces on other magnets, all of which have moving charges.
Right Hand Rule 1
The magnetic force on a moving charge is one of the most fundamental known. Magnetic force is as important as the
electrostatic or Coulomb force. Yet the magnetic force is more complex, in both the number of factors that affects it
and in its direction, than the relatively simple Coulomb force. The magnitude of themagnetic force on a charge
moving at a speed in a magnetic field of strength is given by
22.1
where is the angle between the directions of and This force is often called theLorentz force. In fact, this is
how we define the magnetic field strength —in terms of the force on a charged particle moving in a magnetic field.
The SI unit for magnetic field strength is called thetesla(T) after the eccentric but brilliant inventor Nikola Tesla
(1856–1943). To determine how the tesla relates to other SI units, we solve for .
22.2
Because is unitless, the tesla is
22.3
(note that C/s = A).
Another smaller unit, called thegauss(G), where , is sometimes used. The strongest permanent
magnets have fields near 2 T; superconducting electromagnets may attain 10 T or more. The Earth’s magnetic field
on its surface is only about , or 0.5 G.
Thedirectionof the magnetic force is perpendicular to the plane formed by and , as determined by theright
hand rule 1(or RHR-1), which is illustrated inFigure 22.16. RHR-1 states that, to determine the direction of the
magnetic force on a positive moving charge, you point the thumb of the right hand in the direction of , the fingers in
the direction of , and a perpendicular to the palm points in the direction of . One way to remember this is that
there is one velocity, and so the thumb represents it. There are many field lines, and so the fingers represent them.
The force is in the direction you would push with your palm. The force on a negative charge is in exactly the opposite
direction to that on a positive charge.
FIGURE22.16Magnetic fields exert forces on moving charges. This force is one of the most basic known. The direction of the magnetic
force on a moving charge is perpendicular to the plane formed by and and follows right hand rule–1 (RHR-1) as shown. The magnitude
of the force is proportional to , , , and the sine of the angle between and .
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 981
22.4 • Magnetic Field Strength: Force on a Moving Charge in a Magnetic Field 963
Making Connections: Charges and Magnets
There is no magnetic force on static charges. However, there is a magnetic force on moving charges. When
charges are stationary, their electric fields do not affect magnets. But, when charges move, they produce
magnetic fields that exert forces on other magnets. When there is relative motion, a connection between electric
and magnetic fields emerges—each affects the other.
EXAMPLE 22.1
Calculating Magnetic Force: Earth’s Magnetic Field on a Charged Glass Rod
With the exception of compasses, you seldom see or personally experience forces due to the Earth’s small magnetic
field. To illustrate this, suppose that in a physics lab you rub a glass rod with silk, placing a 20-nC positive charge on
it. Calculate the force on the rod due to the Earth’s magnetic field, if you throw it with a horizontal velocity of 10 m/s
due west in a place where the Earth’s field is due north parallel to the ground. (The direction of the force is
determined with right hand rule 1 as shown inFigure 22.17.)
FIGURE22.17A positively charged object moving due west in a region where the Earth’s magnetic field is due north experiences a force
that is straight down as shown. A negative charge moving in the same direction would feel a force straight up.
Strategy
We are given the charge, its velocity, and the magnetic field strength and direction. We can thus use the equation
to find the force.
Solution
The magnetic force is
22.4
We see that , since the angle between the velocity and the direction of the field is . Entering the other
given quantities yields
22.5
Discussion
This force is completely negligible on any macroscopic object, consistent with experience. (It is calculated to only
one digit, since the Earth’s field varies with location and is given to only one digit.) The Earth’s magnetic field,
however, does produce very important effects, particularly on submicroscopic particles. Some of these are explored
PAGE: 982
964 22 • Magnetism
inForce on a Moving Charge in a Magnetic Field: Examples and Applications.
22.5 Force on a Moving Charge in a Magnetic Field: Examples and
Applications
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the effects of a magnetic field on a moving charge.
• Calculate the radius of curvature of the path of a charge that is moving in a magnetic field.
Magnetic force can cause a charged particle to move in a circular or spiral path. Cosmic rays are energetic charged
particles in outer space, some of which approach the Earth. They can be forced into spiral paths by the Earth’s
magnetic field. Protons in giant accelerators are kept in a circular path by magnetic force. The bubble chamber
photograph inFigure 22.18shows charged particles moving in such curved paths. The curved paths of charged
particles in magnetic fields are the basis of a number of phenomena and can even be used analytically, such as in a
mass spectrometer.
FIGURE22.18Trails of bubbles are produced by high-energy charged particles moving through the superheated liquid hydrogen in this
artist’s rendition of a bubble chamber. There is a strong magnetic field perpendicular to the page that causes the curved paths of the
particles. The radius of the path can be used to find the mass, charge, and energy of the particle.
So does the magnetic force cause circular motion? Magnetic force is always perpendicular to velocity, so that it does
no work on the charged particle. The particle’s kinetic energy and speed thus remain constant. The direction of
motion is affected, but not the speed. This is typical of uniform circular motion. The simplest case occurs when a
charged particle moves perpendicular to a uniform -field, such as shown inFigure 22.19. (If this takes place in a
vacuum, the magnetic field is the dominant factor determining the motion.) Here, the magnetic force supplies the
centripetal force . Noting that , we see that .
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 983
22.5 • Force on a Moving Charge in a Magnetic Field: Examples and Applications 965
FIGURE22.19A negatively charged particle moves in the plane of the page in a region where the magnetic field is perpendicular into the
page (represented by the small circles with x’s—like the tails of arrows). The magnetic force is perpendicular to the velocity, and so velocity
changes in direction but not magnitude. Uniform circular motion results.
Because the magnetic force supplies the centripetal force , we have
22.6
Solving for yields
22.7
Here, is the radius of curvature of the path of a charged particle with mass and charge , moving at a speed
perpendicular to a magnetic field of strength . If the velocity is not perpendicular to the magnetic field, then is
the component of the velocity perpendicular to the field. The component of the velocity parallel to the field is
unaffected, since the magnetic force is zero for motion parallel to the field. This produces a spiral motion rather than
a circular one.
EXAMPLE 22.2
Calculating the Curvature of the Path of an Electron Moving in a Magnetic Field: A Magnet on
a TV Screen
A magnet brought near an old-fashioned TV screen such as inFigure 22.20(TV sets with cathode ray tubes instead
of LCD screens) severely distorts its picture by altering the path of the electrons that make its phosphors glow.
(Don’t try this at home, as it will permanently magnetize and ruin the TV.)To illustrate this, calculate the radius
of curvature of the path of an electron having a velocity of (corresponding to the accelerating voltage
of about 10.0 kV used in some TVs) perpendicular to a magnetic field of strength (obtainable with
permanent magnets).
PAGE: 984
966 22 • Magnetism
FIGURE22.20Side view showing what happens when a magnet comes in contact with a computer monitor or TV screen. Electrons moving
toward the screen spiral about magnetic field lines, maintaining the component of their velocity parallel to the field lines. This distorts the
image on the screen.
Strategy
We can find the radius of curvature directly from the equation , since all other quantities in it are given or
known.
Solution
Using known values for the mass and charge of an electron, along with the given values of and gives us
22.8
or
22.9
Discussion
The small radius indicates a large effect. The electrons in the TV picture tube are made to move in very tight circles,
greatly altering their paths and distorting the image.
Figure 22.21shows how electrons not moving perpendicular to magnetic field lines follow the field lines. The
component of velocity parallel to the lines is unaffected, and so the charges spiral along the field lines. If field
strength increases in the direction of motion, the field will exert a force to slow the charges, forming a kind of
magnetic mirror, as shown below.
FIGURE22.21When a charged particle moves along a magnetic field line into a region where the field becomes stronger, the particle
experiences a force that reduces the component of velocity parallel to the field. This force slows the motion along the field line and here
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 985
22.5 • Force on a Moving Charge in a Magnetic Field: Examples and Applications 967
reverses it, forming a “magnetic mirror.”
The properties of charged particles in magnetic fields are related to such different things as the Aurora Australis or
Aurora Borealis and particle accelerators.Charged particles approaching magnetic field lines may get trapped in
spiral orbits about the lines rather than crossing them, as seen above. Some cosmic rays, for example, follow the
Earth’s magnetic field lines, entering the atmosphere near the magnetic poles and causing the southern or northern
lights through their ionization of molecules in the atmosphere. This glow of energized atoms and molecules is seen
inIntroduction to Magnetism. Those particles that approach middle latitudes must cross magnetic field lines, and
many are prevented from penetrating the atmosphere. Cosmic rays are a component of background radiation;
consequently, they give a higher radiation dose at the poles than at the equator.
FIGURE22.22Energetic electrons and protons, components of cosmic rays, from the Sun and deep outer space often follow the Earth’s
magnetic field lines rather than cross them. (Recall that the Earth’s north magnetic pole is really a south pole in terms of a bar magnet.)
Some incoming charged particles become trapped in the Earth’s magnetic field, forming two belts above the
atmosphere known as the Van Allen radiation belts after the discoverer James A. Van Allen, an American
astrophysicist. (SeeFigure 22.23.) Particles trapped in these belts form radiation fields (similar to nuclear radiation)
so intense that piloted space flights avoid them and satellites with sensitive electronics are kept out of them. In the
few minutes it took lunar missions to cross the Van Allen radiation belts, astronauts received radiation doses more
than twice the allowed annual exposure for radiation workers. Other planets have similar belts, especially those
having strong magnetic fields like Jupiter.
FIGURE22.23The Van Allen radiation belts are two regions in which energetic charged particles are trapped in the Earth’s magnetic field.
One belt lies about 300 km above the Earth’s surface, the other about 16,000 km. Charged particles in these belts migrate along magnetic
field lines and are partially reflected away from the poles by the stronger fields there. The charged particles that enter the atmosphere are
replenished by the Sun and sources in deep outer space.
Back on Earth, we have devices that employ magnetic fields to contain charged particles. Among them are the giant
particle accelerators that have been used to explore the substructure of matter. (SeeFigure 22.24.) Magnetic fields
PAGE: 986
968 22 • Magnetism
not only control the direction of the charged particles, they also are used to focus particles into beams and
overcome the repulsion of like charges in these beams.
FIGURE22.24The Fermilab facility in Illinois has a large particle accelerator (the most powerful in the world until 2008) that employs
magnetic fields (magnets seen here in orange) to contain and direct its beam. This and other accelerators have been in use for several
decades and have allowed us to discover some of the laws underlying all matter. (credit: ammcrim, Flickr)
Thermonuclear fusion (like that occurring in the Sun) is a hope for a future clean energy source. One of the most
promising devices is thetokamak, which uses magnetic fields to contain (or trap) and direct the reactive charged
particles. (SeeFigure 22.25.) Less exotic, but more immediately practical, amplifiers in microwave ovens use a
magnetic field to contain oscillating electrons. These oscillating electrons generate the microwaves sent into the
oven.
FIGURE22.25Tokamaks such as the one shown in the figure are being studied with the goal of economical production of energy by nuclear
fusion. Magnetic fields in the doughnut-shaped device contain and direct the reactive charged particles. (credit: David Mellis, Flickr)
Mass spectrometers have a variety of designs, and many use magnetic fields to measure mass. The curvature of a
charged particle’s path in the field is related to its mass and is measured to obtain mass information. (SeeMore
Applications of Magnetism.) Historically, such techniques were employed in the first direct observations of electron
charge and mass. Today, mass spectrometers (sometimes coupled with gas chromatographs) are used to determine
the make-up and sequencing of large biological molecules.
22.6 The Hall Effect
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the Hall effect.
• Calculate the Hall emf across a current-carrying conductor.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 987
22.6 • The Hall Effect 969
We have seen effects of a magnetic field on free-moving charges. The magnetic field also affects charges moving in
a conductor. One result is the Hall effect, which has important implications and applications.
Figure 22.26shows what happens to charges moving through a conductor in a magnetic field. The field is
perpendicular to the electron drift velocity and to the width of the conductor. Note that conventional current is to the
right in both parts of the figure. In part (a), electrons carry the current and move to the left. In part (b), positive
charges carry the current and move to the right. Moving electrons feel a magnetic force toward one side of the
conductor, leaving a net positive charge on the other side. This separation of chargecreates a voltage , known as
theHall emf,acrossthe conductor. The creation of a voltageacrossa current-carrying conductor by a magnetic field
is known as theHall effect, after Edwin Hall, the American physicist who discovered it in 1879.
FIGURE22.26The Hall effect. (a) Electrons move to the left in this flat conductor (conventional current to the right). The magnetic field is
directly out of the page, represented by circled dots; it exerts a force on the moving charges, causing a voltage , the Hall emf, across the
conductor. (b) Positive charges moving to the right (conventional current also to the right) are moved to the side, producing a Hall emf of the
opposite sign, . Thus, if the direction of the field and current are known, the sign of the charge carriers can be determined from the Hall
effect.
One very important use of the Hall effect is to determine whether positive or negative charges carries the current.
Note that inFigure 22.26(b), where positive charges carry the current, the Hall emf has the sign opposite to when
negative charges carry the current. Historically, the Hall effect was used to show that electrons carry current in
metals and it also shows that positive charges carry current in some semiconductors. The Hall effect is used today
as a research tool to probe the movement of charges, their drift velocities and densities, and so on, in materials. In
1980, it was discovered that the Hall effect is quantized, an example of quantum behavior in a macroscopic object.
The Hall effect has other uses that range from the determination of blood flow rate to precision measurement of
magnetic field strength. To examine these quantitatively, we need an expression for the Hall emf, , across a
conductor. Consider the balance of forces on a moving charge in a situation where , , and are mutually
perpendicular, such as shown inFigure 22.27. Although the magnetic force moves negative charges to one side,
they cannot build up without limit. The electric field caused by their separation opposes the magnetic force,
, and the electric force, , eventually grows to equal it. That is,
22.10
or
22.11
Note that the electric field is uniform across the conductor because the magnetic field is uniform, as is the
conductor. For a uniform electric field, the relationship between electric field and voltage is , where is the
width of the conductor and is the Hall emf. Entering this into the last expression gives
22.12
Solving this for the Hall emf yields
22.13
PAGE: 988
970 22 • Magnetism
where is the Hall effect voltage across a conductor of width through which charges move at a speed .
FIGURE22.27The Hall emf produces an electric force that balances the magnetic force on the moving charges. The magnetic force
produces charge separation, which builds up until it is balanced by the electric force, an equilibrium that is quickly reached.
One of the most common uses of the Hall effect is in the measurement of magnetic field strength . Such devices,
calledHall probes, can be made very small, allowing fine position mapping. Hall probes can also be made very
accurate, usually accomplished by careful calibration. Another application of the Hall effect is to measure fluid flow
in any fluid that has free charges (most do). (SeeFigure 22.28.) A magnetic field applied perpendicular to the flow
direction produces a Hall emf as shown. Note that the sign of depends not on the sign of the charges, but only on
the directions of and . The magnitude of the Hall emf is , where is the pipe diameter, so that the
average velocity can be determined from providing the other factors are known.
FIGURE22.28The Hall effect can be used to measure fluid flow in any fluid having free charges, such as blood. The Hall emf is measured
across the tube perpendicular to the applied magnetic field and is proportional to the average velocity .
EXAMPLE 22.3
Calculating the Hall emf: Hall Effect for Blood Flow
A Hall effect flow probe is placed on an artery, applying a 0.100-T magnetic field across it, in a setup similar to that
inFigure 22.28. What is the Hall emf, given the vessel’s inside diameter is 4.00 mm and the average blood velocity is
20.0 cm/s?
Strategy
Because , , and are mutually perpendicular, the equation can be used to find .
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 989
22.7 • Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying Conductor 971
Solution
Entering the given values for , , and gives
22.14
Discussion
This is the average voltage output. Instantaneous voltage varies with pulsating blood flow. The voltage is small in
this type of measurement. is particularly difficult to measure, because there are voltages associated with heart
action (ECG voltages) that are on the order of millivolts. In practice, this difficulty is overcome by applying an AC
magnetic field, so that the Hall emf is AC with the same frequency. An amplifier can be very selective in picking out
only the appropriate frequency, eliminating signals and noise at other frequencies.
22.7 Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying Conductor
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the effects of a magnetic force on a current-carrying conductor.
• Calculate the magnetic force on a current-carrying conductor.
Because charges ordinarily cannot escape a conductor, the magnetic force on charges moving in a conductor is
transmitted to the conductor itself.
FIGURE22.29The magnetic field exerts a force on a current-carrying wire in a direction given by the right hand rule 1 (the same direction
as that on the individual moving charges). This force can easily be large enough to move the wire, since typical currents consist of very large
numbers of moving charges.
We can derive an expression for the magnetic force on a current by taking a sum of the magnetic forces on individual
charges. (The forces add because they are in the same direction.) The force on an individual charge moving at the
drift velocity is given by . Taking to be uniform over a length of wire and zero elsewhere, the
total magnetic force on the wire is then , where is the number of charge carriers in the
section of wire of length . Now, , where is the number of charge carriers per unit volume and is the
volume of wire in the field. Noting that , where is the cross-sectional area of the wire, then the force on the
wire is . Gathering terms,
22.15
Because (seeCurrent),
22.16
is the equation formagnetic force on a length of wire carrying a current in a uniform magnetic field , as shown
inFigure 22.30. If we divide both sides of this expression by , we find that the magnetic force per unit length of wire
in a uniform field is . The direction of this force is given by RHR-1, with the thumb in the direction of
PAGE: 990
972 22 • Magnetism
the current . Then, with the fingers in the direction of , a perpendicular to the palm points in the direction of , as
inFigure 22.30.
FIGURE22.30The force on a current-carrying wire in a magnetic field is . Its direction is given by RHR-1.
EXAMPLE 22.4
Calculating Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying Wire: A Strong Magnetic Field
Calculate the force on the wire shown inFigure 22.29, given , , and .
Strategy
The force can be found with the given information by using and noting that the angle between and
is , so that .
Solution
Entering the given values into yields
22.17
The units for tesla are ; thus,
22.18
Discussion
This large magnetic field creates a significant force on a small length of wire.
Magnetic force on current-carrying conductors is used to convert electric energy to work. (Motors are a prime
example—they employ loops of wire and are considered in the next section.) Magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) is the
technical name given to a clever application where magnetic force pumps fluids without moving mechanical parts.
(SeeFigure 22.31.)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 991
22.8 • Torque on a Current Loop: Motors and Meters 973
FIGURE22.31Magnetohydrodynamics. The magnetic force on the current passed through this fluid can be used as a nonmechanical pump.
A strong magnetic field is applied across a tube and a current is passed through the fluid at right angles to the field,
resulting in a force on the fluid parallel to the tube axis as shown. The absence of moving parts makes this attractive
for moving a hot, chemically active substance, such as the liquid sodium employed in some nuclear reactors.
Experimental artificial hearts are testing with this technique for pumping blood, perhaps circumventing the adverse
effects of mechanical pumps. (Cell membranes, however, are affected by the large fields needed in MHD, delaying
its practical application in humans.) MHD propulsion for nuclear submarines has been proposed, because it could be
considerably quieter than conventional propeller drives. The deterrent value of nuclear submarines is based on their
ability to hide and survive a first or second nuclear strike. As we slowly disassemble our nuclear weapons arsenals,
the submarine branch will be the last to be decommissioned because of this ability (SeeFigure 22.32.) Existing MHD
drives are heavy and inefficient—much development work is needed.
FIGURE22.32An MHD propulsion system in a nuclear submarine could produce significantly less turbulence than propellers and allow it to
run more silently. The development of a silent drive submarine was dramatized in the book and the filmThe Hunt for Red October.
22.8 Torque on a Current Loop: Motors and Meters
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe how motors and meters work in terms of torque on a current loop.
• Calculate the torque on a current-carrying loop in a magnetic field.
Motorsare the most common application of magnetic force on current-carrying wires. Motors have loops of wire in a
magnetic field. When current is passed through the loops, the magnetic field exerts torque on the loops, which
rotates a shaft. Electrical energy is converted to mechanical work in the process. (SeeFigure 22.33.)
PAGE: 992
974 22 • Magnetism
FIGURE22.33Torque on a current loop. A current-carrying loop of wire attached to a vertically rotating shaft feels magnetic forces that
produce a clockwise torque as viewed from above.
Let us examine the force on each segment of the loop inFigure 22.33to find the torques produced about the axis of
the vertical shaft. (This will lead to a useful equation for the torque on the loop.) We take the magnetic field to be
uniform over the rectangular loop, which has width and height . First, we note that the forces on the top and
bottom segments are vertical and, therefore, parallel to the shaft, producing no torque. Those vertical forces are
equal in magnitude and opposite in direction, so that they also produce no net force on the loop.Figure 22.34shows
views of the loop from above. Torque is defined as , where is the force, is the distance from the
pivot that the force is applied, and is the angle between and . As seen inFigure 22.34(a), right hand rule 1 gives
the forces on the sides to be equal in magnitude and opposite in direction, so that the net force is again zero.
However, each force produces a clockwise torque. Since , the torque on each vertical segment is
, and the two add to give a total torque.
22.19
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 993
22.8 • Torque on a Current Loop: Motors and Meters 975
FIGURE22.34Top views of a current-carrying loop in a magnetic field. (a) The equation for torque is derived using this view. Note that the
perpendicular to the loop makes an angle with the field that is the same as the angle between and . (b) The maximum torque occurs
when is a right angle and . (c) Zero (minimum) torque occurs when is zero and . (d) The torque reverses once the loop
rotates past .
Now, each vertical segment has a length that is perpendicular to , so that the force on each is . Entering
into the expression for torque yields
22.20
If we have a multiple loop of turns, we get times the torque of one loop. Finally, note that the area of the loop
is ; the expression for the torque becomes
22.21
This is the torque on a current-carrying loop in a uniform magnetic field. This equation can be shown to be valid for a
loop of any shape. The loop carries a current , has turns, each of area , and the perpendicular to the loop
makes an angle with the field . The net force on the loop is zero.
EXAMPLE 22.5
Calculating Torque on a Current-Carrying Loop in a Strong Magnetic Field
Find the maximum torque on a 100-turn square loop of a wire of 10.0 cm on a side that carries 15.0 A of current in a
2.00-T field.
PAGE: 994
976 22 • Magnetism
Strategy
Torque on the loop can be found using . Maximum torque occurs when and .
Solution
For , the maximum torque is
22.22
Entering known values yields
22.23
Discussion
This torque is large enough to be useful in a motor.
The torque found in the preceding example is the maximum. As the coil rotates, the torque decreases to zero at
. The torque thenreversesits direction once the coil rotates past . (SeeFigure 22.34(d).) This means
that, unless we do something, the coil will oscillate back and forth about equilibrium at . To get the coil to
continue rotating in the same direction, we can reverse the current as it passes through with automatic
switches calledbrushes. (SeeFigure 22.35.)
FIGURE22.35(a) As the angular momentum of the coil carries it through , the brushes reverse the current to keep the torque
clockwise. (b) The coil will rotate continuously in the clockwise direction, with the current reversing each half revolution to maintain the
clockwise torque.
Meters, such as those in analog fuel gauges on a car, are another common application of magnetic torque on a
current-carrying loop.Figure 22.36shows that a meter is very similar in construction to a motor. The meter in the
figure has its magnets shaped to limit the effect of by making perpendicular to the loop over a large angular
range. Thus the torque is proportional to and not . A linear spring exerts a counter-torque that balances the
current-produced torque. This makes the needle deflection proportional to . If an exact proportionality cannot be
achieved, the gauge reading can be calibrated. To produce a galvanometer for use in analog voltmeters and
ammeters that have a low resistance and respond to small currents, we use a large loop area , high magnetic field
, and low-resistance coils.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 995
22.9 • Magnetic Fields Produced by Currents: Ampere’s Law 977
FIGURE22.36Meters are very similar to motors but only rotate through a part of a revolution. The magnetic poles of this meter are shaped
to keep the component of perpendicular to the loop constant, so that the torque does not depend on and the deflection against the
return spring is proportional only to the current .
22.9 Magnetic Fields Produced by Currents: Ampere’s Law
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Calculate current that produces a magnetic field.
• Use the right hand rule 2 to determine the direction of current or the direction of magnetic field loops.
How much current is needed to produce a significant magnetic field, perhaps as strong as the Earth’s field?
Surveyors will tell you that overhead electric power lines create magnetic fields that interfere with their compass
readings. Indeed, when Oersted discovered in 1820 that a current in a wire affected a compass needle, he was not
dealing with extremely large currents. How does the shape of wires carrying current affect the shape of the
magnetic field created? We noted earlier that a current loop created a magnetic field similar to that of a bar magnet,
but what about a straight wire or a toroid (doughnut)? How is the direction of a current-created field related to the
direction of the current? Answers to these questions are explored in this section, together with a brief discussion of
the law governing the fields created by currents.
Magnetic Field Created by a Long Straight Current-Carrying Wire: Right Hand Rule 2
Magnetic fields have both direction and magnitude. As noted before, one way to explore the direction of a magnetic
field is with compasses, as shown for a long straight current-carrying wire inFigure 22.37. Hall probes can
determine the magnitude of the field. The field around a long straight wire is found to be in circular loops. Theright
hand rule 2(RHR-2) emerges from this exploration and is valid for any current segment—point the thumb in the
direction of the current, and the fingers curl in the direction of the magnetic field loopscreated by it.
PAGE: 996
978 22 • Magnetism
FIGURE22.37(a) Compasses placed near a long straight current-carrying wire indicate that field lines form circular loops centered on the
wire. (b) Right hand rule 2 states that, if the right hand thumb points in the direction of the current, the fingers curl in the direction of the
field. This rule is consistent with the field mapped for the long straight wire and is valid for any current segment.
Themagnetic field strength (magnitude) produced by a long straight current-carrying wireis found by
experiment to be
22.24
where is the current, is the shortest distance to the wire, and the constant is the
permeability of free space. is one of the basic constants in nature. We will see later that is related to the
speed of light.) Since the wire is very long, the magnitude of the field depends only on distance from the wire , not
on position along the wire.
EXAMPLE 22.6
Calculating Current that Produces a Magnetic Field
Find the current in a long straight wire that would produce a magnetic field twice the strength of the Earth’s at a
distance of 5.0 cm from the wire.
Strategy
The Earth’s field is about , and so here due to the wire is taken to be . The equation
can be used to find , since all other quantities are known.
Solution
Solving for and entering known values gives
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 997
22.9 • Magnetic Fields Produced by Currents: Ampere’s Law 979
22.25
Discussion
So a moderately large current produces a significant magnetic field at a distance of 5.0 cm from a long straight wire.
Note that the answer is stated to only two digits, since the Earth’s field is specified to only two digits in this example.
Ampere’s Law and Others
The magnetic field of a long straight wire has more implications than you might at first suspect.Each segment of
current produces a magnetic field like that of a long straight wire, and the total field of any shape current is the
vector sum of the fields due to each segment.The formal statement of the direction and magnitude of the field due
to each segment is called theBiot-Savart law. Integral calculus is needed to sum the field for an arbitrary shape
current. This results in a more complete law, calledAmpere’s law, which relates magnetic field and current in a
general way. Ampere’s law in turn is a part ofMaxwell’s equations, which give a complete theory of all
electromagnetic phenomena. Considerations of how Maxwell’s equations appear to different observers led to the
modern theory of relativity, and the realization that electric and magnetic fields are different manifestations of the
same thing. Most of this is beyond the scope of this text in both mathematical level, requiring calculus, and in the
amount of space that can be devoted to it. But for the interested student, and particularly for those who continue in
physics, engineering, or similar pursuits, delving into these matters further will reveal descriptions of nature that are
elegant as well as profound. In this text, we shall keep the general features in mind, such as RHR-2 and the rules for
magnetic field lines listed inMagnetic Fields and Magnetic Field Lines, while concentrating on the fields created in
certain important situations.
Making Connections: Relativity
Hearing all we do about Einstein, we sometimes get the impression that he invented relativity out of nothing. On
the contrary, one of Einstein’s motivations was to solve difficulties in knowing how different observers see
magnetic and electric fields.
Magnetic Field Produced by a Current-Carrying Circular Loop
The magnetic field near a current-carrying loop of wire is shown inFigure 22.38. Both the direction and the
magnitude of the magnetic field produced by a current-carrying loop are complex. RHR-2 can be used to give the
direction of the field near the loop, but mapping with compasses and the rules about field lines given inMagnetic
Fields and Magnetic Field Linesare needed for more detail. There is a simple formula for themagnetic field
strength at the center of a circular loop. It is
22.26
where is the radius of the loop. This equation is very similar to that for a straight wire, but it is validonlyat the
center of a circular loop of wire. The similarity of the equations does indicate that similar field strength can be
obtained at the center of a loop. One way to get a larger field is to have loops; then, the field is .
Note that the larger the loop, the smaller the field at its center, because the current is farther away.
PAGE: 998
980 22 • Magnetism
FIGURE22.38(a) RHR-2 gives the direction of the magnetic field inside and outside a current-carrying loop. (b) More detailed mapping
with compasses or with a Hall probe completes the picture. The field is similar to that of a bar magnet.
Magnetic Field Produced by a Current-Carrying Solenoid
Asolenoidis a long coil of wire (with many turns or loops, as opposed to a flat loop). Because of its shape, the field
inside a solenoid can be very uniform, and also very strong. The field just outside the coils is nearly zero.Figure
22.39shows how the field looks and how its direction is given by RHR-2.
FIGURE22.39(a) Because of its shape, the field inside a solenoid of length is remarkably uniform in magnitude and direction, as indicated
by the straight and uniformly spaced field lines. The field outside the coils is nearly zero. (b) This cutaway shows the magnetic field
generated by the current in the solenoid.
The magnetic field inside of a current-carrying solenoid is very uniform in direction and magnitude. Only near the
ends does it begin to weaken and change direction. The field outside has similar complexities to flat loops and bar
magnets, but themagnetic field strength inside a solenoidis simply
22.27
where is the number of loops per unit length of the solenoid , with being the number of loops and the
length). Note that is the field strength anywhere in the uniform region of the interior and not just at the center.
Large uniform fields spread over a large volume are possible with solenoids, asExample 22.7implies.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 999
22.10 • Magnetic Force between Two Parallel Conductors 981
EXAMPLE 22.7
Calculating Field Strength inside a Solenoid
What is the field inside a 2.00-m-long solenoid that has 2000 loops and carries a 1600-A current?
Strategy
To find the field strength inside a solenoid, we use . First, we note the number of loops per unit length is
22.28
Solution
Substituting known values gives
22.29
Discussion
This is a large field strength that could be established over a large-diameter solenoid, such as in medical uses of
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The very large current is an indication that the fields of this strength are not
easily achieved, however. Such a large current through 1000 loops squeezed into a meter’s length would produce
significant heating. Higher currents can be achieved by using superconducting wires, although this is expensive.
There is an upper limit to the current, since the superconducting state is disrupted by very large magnetic fields.
There are interesting variations of the flat coil and solenoid. For example, the toroidal coil used to confine the
reactive particles in tokamaks is much like a solenoid bent into a circle. The field inside a toroid is very strong but
circular. Charged particles travel in circles, following the field lines, and collide with one another, perhaps inducing
fusion. But the charged particles do not cross field lines and escape the toroid. A whole range of coil shapes are
used to produce all sorts of magnetic field shapes. Adding ferromagnetic materials produces greater field strengths
and can have a significant effect on the shape of the field. Ferromagnetic materials tend to trap magnetic fields (the
field lines bend into the ferromagnetic material, leaving weaker fields outside it) and are used as shields for devices
that are adversely affected by magnetic fields, including the Earth’s magnetic field.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Generator
Generate electricity with a bar magnet! Discover the physics behind the phenomena by exploring magnets and how
you can use them to make a bulb light.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/l/28gen).
22.10 Magnetic Force between Two Parallel Conductors
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the effects of the magnetic force between two conductors.
• Calculate the force between two parallel conductors.
You might expect that there are significant forces between current-carrying wires, since ordinary currents produce
significant magnetic fields and these fields exert significant forces on ordinary currents. But you might not expect
that the force between wires is used todefinethe ampere. It might also surprise you to learn that this force has
something to do with why large circuit breakers burn up when they attempt to interrupt large currents.
PAGE: 1000
982 22 • Magnetism
The force between two long straight and parallel conductors separated by a distance can be found by applying
what we have developed in preceding sections.Figure 22.40shows the wires, their currents, the fields they create,
and the subsequent forces they exert on one another. Let us consider the field produced by wire 1 and the force it
exerts on wire 2 (call the force ). The field due to at a distance is given to be
22.30
FIGURE22.40(a) The magnetic field produced by a long straight conductor is perpendicular to a parallel conductor, as indicated by RHR-2.
(b) A view from above of the two wires shown in (a), with one magnetic field line shown for each wire. RHR-1 shows that the force between
the parallel conductors is attractive when the currents are in the same direction. A similar analysis shows that the force is repulsive
between currents in opposite directions.
This field is uniform along wire 2 and perpendicular to it, and so the force it exerts on wire 2 is given by
with :
22.31
By Newton’s third law, the forces on the wires are equal in magnitude, and so we just write for the magnitude of
. (Note that .) Since the wires are very long, it is convenient to think in terms of , the force per unit
length. Substituting the expression for into the last equation and rearranging terms gives
22.32
is the force per unit length between two parallel currents and separated by a distance . The force is
attractive if the currents are in the same direction and repulsive if they are in opposite directions.
This force is responsible for thepinch effectin electric arcs and plasmas. The force exists whether the currents are
in wires or not. In an electric arc, where currents are moving parallel to one another, there is an attraction that
squeezes currents into a smaller tube. In large circuit breakers, like those used in neighborhood power distribution
systems, the pinch effect can concentrate an arc between plates of a switch trying to break a large current, burn
holes, and even ignite the equipment. Another example of the pinch effect is found in the solar plasma, where jets of
ionized material, such as solar flares, are shaped by magnetic forces.
Theoperational definition of the ampereis based on the force between current-carrying wires. Note that for parallel
wires separated by 1 meter with each carrying 1 ampere, the force per meter is
22.33
Since is exactly by definition, and because , the force per meter is exactly
. This is the basis of the operational definition of the ampere.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1001
22.11 • More Applications of Magnetism 983
The Ampere
The official definition of the ampere is:
One ampere of current through each of two parallel conductors of infinite length, separated by one meter in
empty space free of other magnetic fields, causes a force of exactly on each conductor.
Infinite-length straight wires are impractical and so, in practice, a current balance is constructed with coils of wire
separated by a few centimeters. Force is measured to determine current. This also provides us with a method for
measuring the coulomb. We measure the charge that flows for a current of one ampere in one second. That is,
. For both the ampere and the coulomb, the method of measuring force between conductors is the
most accurate in practice.
22.11 More Applications of Magnetism
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe some applications of magnetism.
Mass Spectrometry
The curved paths followed by charged particles in magnetic fields can be put to use. A charged particle moving
perpendicular to a magnetic field travels in a circular path having a radius .
22.34
It was noted that this relationship could be used to measure the mass of charged particles such as ions. A mass
spectrometer is a device that measures such masses. Most mass spectrometers use magnetic fields for this
purpose, although some of them have extremely sophisticated designs. Since there are five variables in the
relationship, there are many possibilities. However, if , , and can be fixed, then the radius of the path is simply
proportional to the mass of the charged particle. Let us examine one such mass spectrometer that has a relatively
simple design. (SeeFigure 22.41.) The process begins with an ion source, a device like an electron gun. The ion
source gives ions their charge, accelerates them to some velocity , and directs a beam of them into the next stage
of the spectrometer. This next region is avelocity selectorthat only allows particles with a particular value of to
get through.
PAGE: 1002
984 22 • Magnetism
FIGURE22.41This mass spectrometer uses a velocity selector to fix so that the radius of the path is proportional to mass.
The velocity selector has both an electric field and a magnetic field, perpendicular to one another, producing forces
in opposite directions on the ions. Only those ions for which the forces balance travel in a straight line into the next
region. If the forces balance, then the electric force equals the magnetic force , so that .
Noting that cancels, we see that
22.35
is the velocity particles must have to make it through the velocity selector, and further, that can be selected by
varying and . In the final region, there is only a uniform magnetic field, and so the charged particles move in
circular arcs with radii proportional to particle mass. The paths also depend on charge , but since is in multiples
of electron charges, it is easy to determine and to discriminate between ions in different charge states.
Mass spectrometry today is used extensively in chemistry and biology laboratories to identify chemical and
biological substances according to their mass-to-charge ratios. In medicine, mass spectrometers are used to
measure the concentration of isotopes used as tracers. Usually, biological molecules such as proteins are very large,
so they are broken down into smaller fragments before analyzing. Recently, large virus particles have been analyzed
as a whole on mass spectrometers. Sometimes a gas chromatograph or high-performance liquid chromatograph
provides an initial separation of the large molecules, which are then input into the mass spectrometer.
Cathode Ray Tubes—CRTs—and the Like
What do non-flat-screen TVs, old computer monitors, x-ray machines, and the 2-mile-long Stanford Linear
Accelerator have in common? All of them accelerate electrons, making them different versions of the electron gun.
Many of these devices use magnetic fields to steer the accelerated electrons.Figure 22.42shows the construction
of the type of cathode ray tube (CRT) found in some TVs, oscilloscopes, and old computer monitors. Two pairs of
coils are used to steer the electrons, one vertically and the other horizontally, to their desired destination.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1003
22.11 • More Applications of Magnetism 985
FIGURE22.42The cathode ray tube (CRT) is so named because rays of electrons originate at the cathode in the electron gun. Magnetic
coils are used to steer the beam in many CRTs. In this case, the beam is moved down. Another pair of horizontal coils would steer the beam
horizontally.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)is one of the most useful and rapidly growing medical imaging tools. It non-
invasively produces two-dimensional and three-dimensional images of the body that provide important medical
information with none of the hazards of x-rays. MRI is based on an effect callednuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
in which an externally applied magnetic field interacts with the nuclei of certain atoms, particularly those of
hydrogen (protons). These nuclei possess their own small magnetic fields, similar to those of electrons and the
current loops discussed earlier in this chapter.
When placed in an external magnetic field, such nuclei experience a torque that pushes or aligns the nuclei into one
of two new energy states—depending on the orientation of its spin (analogous to the N pole and S pole in a bar
magnet). Transitions from the lower to higher energy state can be achieved by using an external radio frequency
signal to “flip” the orientation of the small magnets. (This is actually a quantum mechanical process. The direction
of the nuclear magnetic field is quantized as is energy in the radio waves. We will return to these topics in later
chapters.) The specific frequency of the radio waves that are absorbed and reemitted depends sensitively on the
type of nucleus, the chemical environment, and the external magnetic field strength. Therefore, this is aresonance
phenomenon in whichnucleiin amagneticfield act like resonators (analogous to those discussed in the treatment
of sound inOscillatory Motion and Waves) that absorb and reemit only certain frequencies. Hence, the phenomenon
is namednuclear magnetic resonance (NMR).
NMR has been used for more than 50 years as an analytical tool. It was formulated in 1946 by F. Bloch and E.
Purcell, with the 1952 Nobel Prize in Physics going to them for their work. Over the past two decades, NMR has been
developed to produce detailed images in a process now called magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), a name coined to
avoid the use of the word “nuclear” and the concomitant implication that nuclear radiation is involved. (It is not.)
The 2003 Nobel Prize in Medicine went to P. Lauterbur and P. Mansfield for their work with MRI applications.
The largest part of the MRI unit is a superconducting magnet that creates a magnetic field, typically between 1 and
2 T in strength, over a relatively large volume. MRI images can be both highly detailed and informative about
structures and organ functions. It is helpful that normal and non-normal tissues respond differently for slight
changes in the magnetic field. In most medical images, the protons that are hydrogen nuclei are imaged. (About 2/3
of the atoms in the body are hydrogen.) Their location and density give a variety of medically useful information,
such as organ function, the condition of tissue (as in the brain), and the shape of structures, such as vertebral disks
and knee-joint surfaces. MRI can also be used to follow the movement of certain ions across membranes, yielding
information on active transport, osmosis, dialysis, and other phenomena. With excellent spatial resolution, MRI can
provide information about tumors, strokes, shoulder injuries, infections, etc.
An image requires position information as well as the density of a nuclear type (usually protons). By varying the
magnetic field slightly over the volume to be imaged, the resonant frequency of the protons is made to vary with
position. Broadcast radio frequencies are swept over an appropriate range and nuclei absorb and reemit them only if
the nuclei are in a magnetic field with the correct strength. The imaging receiver gathers information through the
body almost point by point, building up a tissue map. The reception of reemitted radio waves as a function of
frequency thus gives position information. These “slices” or cross sections through the body are only several mm
thick. The intensity of the reemitted radio waves is proportional to the concentration of the nuclear type being
flipped, as well as information on the chemical environment in that area of the body. Various techniques are
PAGE: 1004
986 22 • Magnetism
available for enhancing contrast in images and for obtaining more information. Scans called T1, T2, or proton
density scans rely on different relaxation mechanisms of nuclei. Relaxation refers to the time it takes for the protons
to return to equilibrium after the external field is turned off. This time depends upon tissue type and status (such as
inflammation).
While MRI images are superior to x rays for certain types of tissue and have none of the hazards of x rays, they do
not completely supplant x-ray images. MRI is less effective than x rays for detecting breaks in bone, for example,
and in imaging breast tissue, so the two diagnostic tools complement each other. MRI images are also expensive
compared to simple x-ray images and tend to be used most often where they supply information not readily
obtained from x rays. Another disadvantage of MRI is that the patient is totally enclosed with detectors close to the
body for about 30 minutes or more, leading to claustrophobia. It is also difficult for the obese patient to be in the
magnet tunnel. New “open-MRI” machines are now available in which the magnet does not completely surround the
patient.
Over the last decade, the development of much faster scans, called “functional MRI” (fMRI), has allowed us to map
the functioning of various regions in the brain responsible for thought and motor control. This technique measures
the change in blood flow for activities (thought, experiences, action) in the brain. The nerve cells increase their
consumption of oxygen when active. Blood hemoglobin releases oxygen to active nerve cells and has somewhat
different magnetic properties when oxygenated than when deoxygenated. With MRI, we can measure this and
detect a blood oxygen-dependent signal. Most of the brain scans today use fMRI.
Other Medical Uses of Magnetic Fields
Currents in nerve cells and the heart create magnetic fields like any other currents. These can be measured but with
some difficulty since their strengths are about to lessthan the Earth’s magnetic field. Recording of the
heart’s magnetic field as it beats is called amagnetocardiogram (MCG), while measurements of the brain’s
magnetic field is called amagnetoencephalogram (MEG). Both give information that differs from that obtained by
measuring the electric fields of these organs (ECGs and EEGs), but they are not yet of sufficient importance to make
these difficult measurements common.
In both of these techniques, the sensors do not touch the body. MCG can be used in fetal studies, and is probably
more sensitive than echocardiography. MCG also looks at the heart’s electrical activity whose voltage output is too
small to be recorded by surface electrodes as in EKG. It has the potential of being a rapid scan for early diagnosis of
cardiac ischemia (obstruction of blood flow to the heart) or problems with the fetus.
MEG can be used to identify abnormal electrical discharges in the brain that produce weak magnetic signals.
Therefore, it looks at brain activity, not just brain structure. It has been used for studies of Alzheimer’s disease and
epilepsy. Advances in instrumentation to measure very small magnetic fields have allowed these two techniques to
be used more in recent years. What is used is a sensor called a SQUID, for superconducting quantum interference
device. This operates at liquid helium temperatures and can measure magnetic fields thousands of times smaller
than the Earth’s.
Finally, there is a burgeoning market for magnetic cures in which magnets are applied in a variety of ways to the
body, from magnetic bracelets to magnetic mattresses. The best that can be said for such practices is that they are
apparently harmless, unless the magnets get close to the patient’s computer or magnetic storage disks. Claims are
made for a broad spectrum of benefits from cleansing the blood to giving the patient more energy, but clinical
studies have not verified these claims, nor is there an identifiable mechanism by which such benefits might occur.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Magnet and Compass
Ever wonder how a compass worked to point you to the Arctic? Explore the interactions between a compass and bar
magnet, and then add the Earth and find the surprising answer! Vary the magnet's strength, and see how things
change both inside and outside. Use the field meter to measure how the magnetic field changes.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/l/28magcomp).
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1005
22.11 • More Applications of Magnetism 987
PAGE: 1006
988 22 • Glossary
Glossary
Ampere’s law the physical law that states that the magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) a medical
magnetic field around an electric current is imaging technique that uses magnetic fields create
proportional to the current; each segment of current detailed images of internal tissues and organs
produces a magnetic field like that of a long straight magnetized to be turned into a magnet; to be
wire, and the total field of any shape current is the induced to be magnetic
vector sum of the fields due to each segment magnetocardiogram (MCG) a recording of the heart’s
B-field another term for magnetic field magnetic field as it beats
Biot-Savart law a physical law that describes the magnetoencephalogram (MEG) a measurement of
magnetic field generated by an electric current in the brain’s magnetic field
terms of a specific equation Maxwell’s equations a set of four equations that
Curie temperature the temperature above which a describe electromagnetic phenomena
ferromagnetic material cannot be magnetized meter common application of magnetic torque on a
direction of magnetic field lines the direction that current-carrying loop that is very similar in
the north end of a compass needle points construction to a motor; by design, the torque is
domains regions within a material that behave like proportional to and not , so the needle deflection
small bar magnets is proportional to the current
electromagnet an object that is temporarily magnetic motor loop of wire in a magnetic field; when current
when an electrical current is passed through it is passed through the loops, the magnetic field
electromagnetism the use of electrical currents to exerts torque on the loops, which rotates a shaft;
induce magnetism electrical energy is converted to mechanical work in
ferromagnetic materials, such as iron, cobalt, nickel, the process
and gadolinium, that exhibit strong magnetic effects north magnetic pole the end or the side of a magnet
gauss G, the unit of the magnetic field strength; that is attracted toward Earth’s geographic north
pole
Hall effect the creation of voltage across a current- nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) a phenomenon
carrying conductor by a magnetic field in which an externally applied magnetic field
Hall emf the electromotive force created by a interacts with the nuclei of certain atoms
current-carrying conductor by a magnetic field, permeability of free space the measure of the ability
of a material, in this case free space, to support a
Lorentz force the force on a charge moving in a magnetic field; the constant
magnetic field
magnetic field the representation of magnetic forces right hand rule 1 (RHR-1) the rule to determine the
magnetic field lines the pictorial representation of direction of the magnetic force on a positive moving
the strength and the direction of a magnetic field charge: when the thumb of the right hand points in
magnetic field strength (magnitude) produced by a the direction of the charge’s velocity and the
long straight current-carrying wire defined as fingers point in the direction of the magnetic field ,
then the force on the charge is perpendicular and
, where is the current, is the shortest
away from the palm; the force on a negative charge
distance to the wire, and is the permeability of
is perpendicular and into the palm
free space
right hand rule 2 (RHR-2) a rule to determine the
magnetic field strength at the center of a circular
direction of the magnetic field induced by a current-
loop defined as where is the radius of
carrying wire: Point the thumb of the right hand in
the loop the direction of current, and the fingers curl in the
magnetic field strength inside a solenoid defined as direction of the magnetic field loops
where is the number of loops per unit solenoid a thin wire wound into a coil that produces a
length of the solenoid , with being the magnetic field when an electric current is passed
number of loops and the length) through it
magnetic force the force on a charge produced by its south magnetic pole the end or the side of a magnet
motion through a magnetic field; the Lorentz force that is attracted toward Earth’s geographic south
magnetic monopoles an isolated magnetic pole; a pole
south pole without a north pole, or vice versa (no tesla T, the SI unit of the magnetic field strength;
magnetic monopole has ever been observed)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1007
22 • Section Summary 989
Section Summary
22.1Magnets the magnitude of which is
• Magnetism is a subject that includes the
where is the angle between the directions of
properties of magnets, the effect of the magnetic
and .
force on moving charges and currents, and the
• The SI unit for magnetic field strength is the
creation of magnetic fields by currents.
tesla (T), which is related to other units by
• There are two types of magnetic poles, called the
north magnetic pole and south magnetic pole.
• North magnetic poles are those that are attracted • Thedirectionof the force on a moving charge is
toward the Earth’s geographic north pole. given by right hand rule 1 (RHR-1): Point the
• Like poles repel and unlike poles attract. thumb of the right hand in the direction of , the
• Magnetic poles always occur in pairs of north and fingers in the direction of , and a perpendicular to
south—it is not possible to isolate north and south the palm points in the direction of .
poles. • The force is perpendicular to the plane formed by
and . Since the force is zero if is parallel to ,
22.2Ferromagnets and Electromagnets
charged particles often follow magnetic field lines
• Magnetic poles always occur in pairs of north and rather than cross them.
south—it is not possible to isolate north and south
22.5Force on a Moving Charge in a
poles.
Magnetic Field: Examples and Applications
• All magnetism is created by electric current.
• Ferromagnetic materials, such as iron, are those
• Magnetic force can supply centripetal force and
that exhibit strong magnetic effects.
cause a charged particle to move in a circular path
• The atoms in ferromagnetic materials act like
of radius
small magnets (due to currents within the atoms)
and can be aligned, usually in millimeter-sized
regions called domains. where is the component of the velocity
• Domains can grow and align on a larger scale, perpendicular to for a charged particle with
producing permanent magnets. Such a material is mass and charge .
magnetized, or induced to be magnetic.
22.6The Hall Effect
• Above a material’s Curie temperature, thermal
agitation destroys the alignment of atoms, and • The Hall effect is the creation of voltage , known
ferromagnetism disappears. as the Hall emf, across a current-carrying
• Electromagnets employ electric currents to make conductor by a magnetic field.
magnetic fields, often aided by induced fields in • The Hall emf is given by
ferromagnetic materials.
for a conductor of width through which charges
22.3Magnetic Fields and Magnetic Field
move at a speed .
Lines
22.7Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying
• Magnetic fields can be pictorially represented by
Conductor
magnetic field lines, the properties of which are as
follows: • The magnetic force on current-carrying conductors
is given by
1. The field is tangent to the magnetic field line.
2. Field strength is proportional to the line density.
where is the current, is the length of a straight
3. Field lines cannot cross.
conductor in a uniform magnetic field , and is
4. Field lines are continuous loops.
the angle between and . The force follows
22.4Magnetic Field Strength: Force on a RHR-1 with the thumb in the direction of .
Moving Charge in a Magnetic Field
• Magnetic fields exert a force on a moving chargeq,
PAGE: 1008
990 22 • Conceptual Questions
22.8Torque on a Current Loop: Motors and • The magnetic field strength at the center of a
Meters circular loop is given by
• The torque on a current-carrying loop of any
shape in a uniform magnetic field. is where is the radius of the loop. This equation
becomes for a flat coil of loops.
where is the number of turns, is the current, RHR-2 gives the direction of the field about the
is the area of the loop, is the magnetic field loop. A long coil is called a solenoid.
strength, and is the angle between the • The magnetic field strength inside a solenoid is
perpendicular to the loop and the magnetic field.
where is the number of loops per unit length of
22.9Magnetic Fields Produced by Currents:
the solenoid. The field inside is very uniform in
Ampere’s Law
magnitude and direction.
• The strength of the magnetic field created by
22.10Magnetic Force between Two Parallel
current in a long straight wire is given by
Conductors
• The force between two parallel currents and
where is the current, is the shortest distance to
, separated by a distance , has a magnitude per
the wire, and the constant
unit length given by
is the permeability of
free space.
• The direction of the magnetic field created by a • The force is attractive if the currents are in the
long straight wire is given by right hand rule 2 same direction, repulsive if they are in opposite
(RHR-2):Point the thumb of the right hand in the directions.
direction of current, and the fingers curl in the
22.11More Applications of Magnetism
direction of the magnetic field loopscreated by it.
• The magnetic field created by current following • Crossed (perpendicular) electric and magnetic
any path is the sum (or integral) of the fields due to fields act as a velocity filter, giving equal and
segments along the path (magnitude and direction opposite forces on any charge with velocity
as for a straight wire), resulting in a general perpendicular to the fields and of magnitude
relationship between current and field known as
Ampere’s law.
Conceptual Questions
22.1Magnets 3. List the ways in which magnetic field lines and
electric field lines are similar. For example, the field
1. Volcanic and other such activity at the mid-Atlantic
direction is tangent to the line at any point in space.
ridge extrudes material to fill the gap between
Also list the ways in which they differ. For example,
separating tectonic plates associated with
electric force is parallel to electric field lines,
continental drift. The magnetization of rocks is
whereas magnetic force on moving charges is
found to reverse in a coordinated manner with
perpendicular to magnetic field lines.
distance from the ridge. What does this imply about
4. Noting that the magnetic field lines of a bar magnet
the Earth’s magnetic field and how could the
resemble the electric field lines of a pair of equal
knowledge of the spreading rate be used to give its
and opposite charges, do you expect the magnetic
historical record?
field to rapidly decrease in strength with distance
from the magnet? Is this consistent with your
22.3Magnetic Fields and Magnetic Field
experience with magnets?
Lines
5. Is the Earth’s magnetic field parallel to the ground
2. Explain why the magnetic field would not be unique at all locations? If not, where is it parallel to the
(that is, not have a single value) at a point in space surface? Is its strength the same at all locations? If
where magnetic field lines might cross. (Consider not, where is it greatest?
the direction of the field at such a point.)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1009
22 • Conceptual Questions 991
22.4Magnetic Field Strength: Force on a 13. While operating, a high-precision TV monitor is
Moving Charge in a Magnetic Field placed on its side during maintenance. The image
on the monitor changes color and blurs slightly.
6. If a charged particle moves in a straight line through
Discuss the possible relation of these effects to
some region of space, can you say that the
the Earth’s magnetic field.
magnetic field in that region is necessarily zero?
22.6The Hall Effect
22.5Force on a Moving Charge in a
Magnetic Field: Examples and Applications 14. Discuss how the Hall effect could be used to
obtain information on free charge density in a
7. How can the motion of a charged particle be used
conductor. (Hint: Consider how drift velocity and
to distinguish between a magnetic and an electric
current are related.)
field?
8. High-velocity charged particles can damage
22.7Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying
biological cells and are a component of radiation
Conductor
exposure in a variety of locations ranging from
research facilities to natural background. Describe 15. Draw a sketch of the situation inFigure 22.29
how you could use a magnetic field to shield showing the direction of electrons carrying the
yourself. current, and use RHR-1 to verify the direction of
9. If a cosmic ray proton approaches the Earth from the force on the wire.
outer space along a line toward the center of the 16. Verify that the direction of the force in an MHD
Earth that lies in the plane of the equator, in what drive, such as that inFigure 22.31, does not
direction will it be deflected by the Earth’s magnetic depend on the sign of the charges carrying the
field? What about an electron? A neutron? current across the fluid.
10. What are the signs of the charges on the particles 17. Why would a magnetohydrodynamic drive work
inFigure 22.43? better in ocean water than in fresh water? Also,
why would superconducting magnets be
desirable?
18. Which is more likely to interfere with compass
readings, AC current in your refrigerator or DC
current when you start your car? Explain.
22.8Torque on a Current Loop: Motors and
Meters
19. Draw a diagram and use RHR-1 to show that the
forces on the top and bottom segments of the
FIGURE22.43
motor’s current loop inFigure 22.33are vertical
11. Which of the particles inFigure 22.44has the
and produce no torque about the axis of rotation.
greatest velocity, assuming they have identical
charges and masses?
22.9Magnetic Fields Produced by Currents:
Ampere’s Law
20. Make a drawing and use RHR-2 to find the
direction of the magnetic field of a current loop in
a motor (such as inFigure 22.33). Then show that
the direction of the torque on the loop is the same
as produced by like poles repelling and unlike
poles attracting.
FIGURE22.44
12. Which of the particles inFigure 22.44has the
greatest mass, assuming all have identical charges
and velocities?
PAGE: 1010
992 22 • Conceptual Questions
22.10Magnetic Force between Two Parallel 24. Use the right hand rules to show that the force
Conductors between the two loops inFigure 22.46is
attractive if the currents are in the same direction
21. Is the force attractive or repulsive between the
and repulsive if they are in opposite directions. Is
hot and neutral lines hung from power poles?
this consistent with like poles of the loops
Why?
repelling and unlike poles of the loops attracting?
22. If you have three parallel wires in the same plane,
Draw sketches to justify your answers.
as inFigure 22.45, with currents in the outer two
running in opposite directions, is it possible for the
middle wire to be repelled by both? Attracted by
both? Explain.
FIGURE22.45Three parallel coplanar wires with currents in FIGURE22.46Two loops of wire carrying currents can exert
the outer two in opposite directions. forces and torques on one another.
23. Suppose two long straight wires run perpendicular 25. If one of the loops inFigure 22.46is tilted slightly
to one another without touching. Does one exert a relative to the other and their currents are in the
net force on the other? If so, what is its direction? same direction, what are the directions of the
Does one exert a net torque on the other? If so, torques they exert on each other? Does this imply
what is its direction? Justify your responses by that the poles of the bar magnet-like fields they
using the right hand rules. create will line up with each other if the loops are
allowed to rotate?
26. Electric field lines can be shielded by the Faraday
cage effect. Can we have magnetic shielding? Can
we have gravitational shielding?
22.11More Applications of Magnetism
27. Measurements of the weak and fluctuating
magnetic fields associated with brain activity are
called magnetoencephalograms (MEGs). Do the
brain’s magnetic fields imply coordinated or
uncoordinated nerve impulses? Explain.
28. Discuss the possibility that a Hall voltage would be
generated on the moving heart of a patient during
MRI imaging. Also discuss the same effect on the
wires of a pacemaker. (The fact that patients with
pacemakers are not given MRIs is significant.)
29. A patient in an MRI unit turns his head quickly to
one side and experiences momentary dizziness
and a strange taste in his mouth. Discuss the
possible causes.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1011
22 • Problems & Exercises 993
30. You are told that in a certain region there is either 32. Draw gravitational field lines between 2 masses,
a uniform electric or magnetic field. What electric field lines between a positive and a
measurement or observation could you make to negative charge, electric field lines between 2
determine the type? (Ignore the Earth’s magnetic positive charges and magnetic field lines around a
field.) magnet. Qualitatively describe the differences
31. An example of magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) between the fields and the entities responsible for
comes from the flow of a river (salty water). This the field lines.
fluid interacts with the Earth’s magnetic field to
produce a potential difference between the two
river banks. How would you go about calculating
the potential difference?
Problems & Exercises
22.4Magnetic Field Strength: Force on a 5. What is the direction of the magnetic field that
Moving Charge in a Magnetic Field produces the magnetic force on a positive charge as
shown in each of the three cases in the figure
1. What is the direction of the magnetic force on a
below, assuming is perpendicular to ?
positive charge that moves as shown in each of the
six cases shown inFigure 22.47?
FIGURE22.49
6. Repeat the previous exercise for a negative charge.
7. What is the maximum magnitude of the force on an
aluminum rod with a charge that you
pass between the poles of a 1.50-T permanent
magnet at a speed of 5.00 m/s? In what direction is
the force?
FIGURE22.47 8. (a) Aircraft sometimes acquire small static charges.
Suppose a supersonic jet has a charge
2. Repeat the previous exercise for a negative charge.
and flies due west at a speed of 660 m/s over the
3. What is the direction of the velocity of a negative
Earth’s magnetic south pole (near Earth's
charge that experiences the magnetic force shown
geographic north pole), where the
in each of the three cases inFigure 22.48, assuming
magnetic field points straight down. What are the
it moves perpendicular to
direction and the magnitude of the magnetic force
on the plane? (b) Discuss whether the value
obtained in part (a) implies this is a significant or
negligible effect.
9. (a) A cosmic ray proton moving toward the Earth at
experiences a magnetic force of
. What is the strength of the
magnetic field if there is a angle between it and
the proton’s velocity? (b) Is the value obtained in
part (a) consistent with the known strength of the
FIGURE22.48
Earth’s magnetic field on its surface? Discuss.
4. Repeat the previous exercise for a positive charge.
PAGE: 1012
994 22 • Problems & Exercises
10. An electron moving at in a 1.25-T 16. What radius circular path does an electron travel if
magnetic field experiences a magnetic force of it moves at the same speed and in the same
. What angle does the velocity of magnetic field as the proton inExercise 22.13?
the electron make with the magnetic field? There 17. A velocity selector in a mass spectrometer uses a
are two answers. 0.100-T magnetic field. (a) What electric field
11. (a) A physicist performing a sensitive strength is needed to select a speed of
measurement wants to limit the magnetic force on ? (b) What is the voltage between
a moving charge in her equipment to less than the plates if they are separated by 1.00 cm?
. What is the greatest the charge 18. An electron in a TV CRT moves with a speed of
can be if it moves at a maximum speed of 30.0 , in a direction perpendicular to the
m/s in the Earth’s field? (b) Discuss whether it Earth’s field, which has a strength of
would be difficult to limit the charge to less than . (a) What strength electric field
the value found in (a) by comparing it with typical must be applied perpendicular to the Earth’s field
static electricity and noting that static is often to make the electron moves in a straight line? (b)
absent. If this is done between plates separated by 1.00
cm, what is the voltage applied? (Note that TVs
22.5Force on a Moving Charge in a are usually surrounded by a ferromagnetic
Magnetic Field: Examples and Applications material to shield against external magnetic fields
and avoid the need for such a correction.)
If you need additional support for these problems, see
19. (a) At what speed will a proton move in a circular
More Applications of Magnetism.
path of the same radius as the electron inExercise
12. A cosmic ray electron moves at 22.12? (b) What would the radius of the path be if
perpendicular to the Earth’s magnetic field at an the proton had the same speed as the electron?
(c) What would the radius be if the proton had the
altitude where field strength is .
same kinetic energy as the electron? (d) The same
What is the radius of the circular path the electron
momentum?
follows?
20. A mass spectrometer is being used to separate
13. A proton moves at perpendicular
common oxygen-16 from the much rarer
to a magnetic field. The field causes the proton to
oxygen-18, taken from a sample of old glacial ice.
travel in a circular path of radius 0.800 m. What is
(The relative abundance of these oxygen isotopes
the field strength?
is related to climatic temperature at the time the
14. (a) Viewers ofStar Trekhear of an antimatter drive
ice was deposited.) The ratio of the masses of
on the StarshipEnterprise. One possibility for such
these two ions is 16 to 18, the mass of oxygen-16
a futuristic energy source is to store antimatter
charged particles in a vacuum chamber, circulating is and they are singly charged
in a magnetic field, and then extract them as and travel at in a 1.20-T magnetic
needed. Antimatter annihilates with normal field. What is the separation between their paths
matter, producing pure energy. What strength when they hit a target after traversing a
magnetic field is needed to hold antiprotons, semicircle?
moving at in a circular path 2.00 21. (a) Triply charged uranium-235 and uranium-238
m in radius? Antiprotons have the same mass as ions are being separated in a mass spectrometer.
protons but the opposite (negative) charge. (b) Is (The much rarer uranium-235 is used as reactor
this field strength obtainable with today’s fuel.) The masses of the ions are
technology or is it a futuristic possibility? and , respectively, and they travel
15. (a) An oxygen-16 ion with a mass of at in a 0.250-T field. What is the
travels at separation between their paths when they hit a
perpendicular to a 1.20-T magnetic field, which target after traversing a semicircle? (b) Discuss
makes it move in a circular arc with a 0.231-m whether this distance between their paths seems
radius. What positive charge is on the ion? (b) to be big enough to be practical in the separation
What is the ratio of this charge to the charge of an of uranium-235 from uranium-238.
electron? (c) Discuss why the ratio found in (b)
should be an integer.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1013
22 • Problems & Exercises 995
22.6The Hall Effect 22.7Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying
Conductor
22. A large water main is 2.50 m in diameter and the
average water velocity is 6.00 m/s. Find the Hall 31. What is the direction of the magnetic force on the
voltage produced if the pipe runs perpendicular to current in each of the six cases inFigure 22.50?
the Earth’s field.
23. What Hall voltage is produced by a 0.200-T field
applied across a 2.60-cm-diameter aorta when
blood velocity is 60.0 cm/s?
24. (a) What is the speed of a supersonic aircraft with
a 17.0-m wingspan, if it experiences a 1.60-V Hall
voltage between its wing tips when in level flight
over the north magnetic pole, where the Earth’s
field strength is (b) Explain why
very little current flows as a result of this Hall
voltage.
25. A nonmechanical water meter could utilize the
Hall effect by applying a magnetic field across a
metal pipe and measuring the Hall voltage
produced. What is the average fluid velocity in a
FIGURE22.50
3.00-cm-diameter pipe, if a 0.500-T field across it
32. What is the direction of a current that experiences
creates a 60.0-mV Hall voltage?
the magnetic force shown in each of the three
26. Calculate the Hall voltage induced on a patient’s
cases inFigure 22.51, assuming the current runs
heart while being scanned by an MRI unit.
perpendicular to ?
Approximate the conducting path on the heart
wall by a wire 7.50 cm long that moves at 10.0
cm/s perpendicular to a 1.50-T magnetic field.
27. A Hall probe calibrated to read when
placed in a 2.00-T field is placed in a 0.150-T field.
What is its output voltage?
28. Using information inExample 20.6, what would
the Hall voltage be if a 2.00-T field is applied
across a 10-gauge copper wire (2.588 mm in
diameter) carrying a 20.0-A current?
29. Show that the Hall voltage across wires made of FIGURE22.51
the same material, carrying identical currents, and 33. What is the direction of the magnetic field that
subjected to the same magnetic field is inversely produces the magnetic force shown on the
proportional to their diameters. (Hint: Consider currents in each of the three cases inFigure
how drift velocity depends on wire diameter.) 22.52, assuming is perpendicular to ?
30. A patient with a pacemaker is mistakenly being
scanned for an MRI image. A 10.0-cm-long
section of pacemaker wire moves at a speed of
10.0 cm/s perpendicular to the MRI unit’s
magnetic field and a 20.0-mV Hall voltage is
induced. What is the magnetic field strength?
FIGURE22.52
PAGE: 1014
996 22 • Problems & Exercises
34. (a) What is the force per meter on a lightning bolt 40. The force on the rectangular loop of wire in the
at the equator that carries 20,000 A perpendicular magnetic field inFigure 22.53can be used to
to the Earth’s field? (b) What is the measure field strength. The field is uniform, and
direction of the force if the current is straight up the plane of the loop is perpendicular to the field.
and the Earth’s field direction is due north, parallel (a) What is the direction of the magnetic force on
to the ground? the loop? Justify the claim that the forces on the
35. (a) A DC power line for a light-rail system carries sides of the loop are equal and opposite,
1000 A at an angle of to the Earth’s independent of how much of the loop is in the field
field. What is the force on a and do not affect the net force on the loop. (b) If a
100-m section of this line? (b) Discuss practical current of 5.00 A is used, what is the force per
concerns this presents, if any. tesla on the 20.0-cm-wide loop?
36. What force is exerted on the water in an MHD drive
utilizing a 25.0-cm-diameter tube, if 100-A
current is passed across the tube that is
perpendicular to a 2.00-T magnetic field? (The
relatively small size of this force indicates the
need for very large currents and magnetic fields to
make practical MHD drives.)
37. A wire carrying a 30.0-A current passes between
the poles of a strong magnet that is perpendicular
to its field and experiences a 2.16-N force on the
4.00 cm of wire in the field. What is the average
field strength?
38. (a) A 0.750-m-long section of cable carrying
current to a car starter motor makes an angle of
with the Earth’s field. What is
the current when the wire experiences a force of
? (b) If you run the wire between
the poles of a strong horseshoe magnet,
FIGURE22.53A rectangular loop of wire carrying a current
subjecting 5.00 cm of it to a 1.75-T field, what is perpendicular to a magnetic field. The field is uniform in
force is exerted on this segment of wire? the region shown and is zero outside that region.
39. (a) What is the angle between a wire carrying an
8.00-A current and the 1.20-T field it is in if 50.0 22.8Torque on a Current Loop: Motors and
cm of the wire experiences a magnetic force of
Meters
2.40 N? (b) What is the force on the wire if it is
rotated to make an angle of with the field? 41. (a) By how many percent is the torque of a motor
decreased if its permanent magnets lose 5.0% of
their strength? (b) How many percent would the
current need to be increased to return the torque
to original values?
42. (a) What is the maximum torque on a 150-turn
square loop of wire 18.0 cm on a side that carries
a 50.0-A current in a 1.60-T field? (b) What is the
torque when is
43. Find the current through a loop needed to create a
maximum torque of The loop has 50
square turns that are 15.0 cm on a side and is in a
uniform 0.800-T magnetic field.
44. Calculate the magnetic field strength needed on a
200-turn square loop 20.0 cm on a side to create
a maximum torque of if the loop is
carrying 25.0 A.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1015
22 • Problems & Exercises 997
45. Since the equation for torque on a current- 54. An AC appliance cord has its hot and neutral wires
carrying loop is , the units of separated by 3.00 mm and carries a 5.00-A
must equal units of . Verify this. current. (a) What is the average force per meter
46. (a) At what angle is the torque on a current loop between the wires in the cord? (b) What is the
90.0% of maximum? (b) 50.0% of maximum? (c) maximum force per meter between the wires? (c)
10.0% of maximum? Are the forces attractive or repulsive? (d) Do
47. A proton has a magnetic field due to its spin on its appliance cords need any special design features
axis. The field is similar to that created by a to compensate for these forces?
circular current loop in radius 55. Figure 22.54shows a long straight wire near a
with a current of (no kidding). Find rectangular current loop. What is the direction and
the maximum torque on a proton in a 2.50-T field. magnitude of the total force on the loop?
(This is a significant torque on a small particle.)
48. (a) A 200-turn circular loop of radius 50.0 cm is
vertical, with its axis on an east-west line. A
current of 100 A circulates clockwise in the loop
when viewed from the east. The Earth’s field here
is due north, parallel to the ground, with a strength
of . What are the direction and
magnitude of the torque on the loop? (b) Does this
device have any practical applications as a motor?
49. RepeatExercise 22.41, but with the loop lying flat FIGURE22.54
on the ground with its current circulating
56. Find the direction and magnitude of the force that
counterclockwise (when viewed from above) in a
each wire experiences inFigure 22.55(a) by, using
location where the Earth’s field is north, but at an
vector addition.
angle below the horizontal and with a
strength of .
22.10Magnetic Force between Two Parallel
Conductors
50. (a) The hot and neutral wires supplying DC power
to a light-rail commuter train carry 800 A and are
FIGURE22.55
separated by 75.0 cm. What is the magnitude and
direction of the force between 50.0 m of these 57. Find the direction and magnitude of the force that
wires? (b) Discuss the practical consequences of each wire experiences inFigure 22.55(b), using
this force, if any. vector addition.
51. The force per meter between the two wires of a
jumper cable being used to start a stalled car is
0.225 N/m. (a) What is the current in the wires,
given they are separated by 2.00 cm? (b) Is the
force attractive or repulsive?
52. A 2.50-m segment of wire supplying current to the
motor of a submerged submarine carries 1000 A
and feels a 4.00-N repulsive force from a parallel
wire 5.00 cm away. What is the direction and
magnitude of the current in the other wire?
53. The wire carrying 400 A to the motor of a
commuter train feels an attractive force of
due to a parallel wire carrying
5.00 A to a headlight. (a) How far apart are the
wires? (b) Are the currents in the same direction?
PAGE: 1016
998 22 • Problems & Exercises
22.11More Applications of Magnetism 63. Nonnuclear submarines use batteries for power
when submerged. (a) Find the magnetic field 50.0
58. Indicate whether the magnetic field created in
cm from a straight wire carrying 1200 A from the
each of the three situations shown inFigure 22.56
batteries to the drive mechanism of a submarine.
is into or out of the page on the left and right of the
(b) What is the field if the wires to and from the
current.
drive mechanism are side by side? (c) Discuss the
effects this could have for a compass on the
submarine that is not shielded.
64. How strong is the magnetic field inside a solenoid
with 10,000 turns per meter that carries 20.0 A?
65. What current is needed in the solenoid described
inExercise 22.58to produce a magnetic field
times the Earth’s magnetic field of ?
66. How far from the starter cable of a car, carrying
150 A, must you be to experience a field less than
the Earth’s Assume a long
straight wire carries the current. (In practice, the
body of your car shields the dashboard compass.)
67. Measurements affect the system being measured,
FIGURE22.56 such as the current loop inFigure 22.53. (a)
59. What are the directions of the fields in the center of the Estimate the field the loop creates by calculating
loop and coils shown inFigure 22.57? the field at the center of a circular loop 20.0 cm in
diameter carrying 5.00 A. (b) What is the smallest
field strength this loop can be used to measure, if
its field must alter the measured field by less than
0.0100%?
68. Figure 22.59shows a long straight wire just
touching a loop carrying a current . Both lie in
FIGURE22.57 the same plane. (a) What direction must the
current in the straight wire have to create a
60. What are the directions of the currents in the loop and
field at the center of the loop in the direction
coils shown inFigure 22.58?
opposite to that created by the loop? (b) What is
the ratio of that gives zero field strength at
the center of the loop? (c) What is the direction of
the field directly above the loop under this
circumstance?
FIGURE22.58
61. To see why an MRI utilizes iron to increase the
magnetic field created by a coil, calculate the
current needed in a 400-loop-per-meter circular
coil 0.660 m in radius to create a 1.20-T field
(typical of an MRI instrument) at its center with no
iron present. The magnetic field of a proton is
approximately like that of a circular current loop
in radius carrying . FIGURE22.59
What is the field at the center of such a loop? 69. Find the magnitude and direction of the magnetic
62. Inside a motor, 30.0 A passes through a 250-turn field at the point equidistant from the wires in
circular loop that is 10.0 cm in radius. What is the Figure 22.55(a), using the rules of vector addition
magnetic field strength created at its center? to sum the contributions from each wire.
70. Find the magnitude and direction of the magnetic
field at the point equidistant from the wires in
Figure 22.55(b), using the rules of vector addition
to sum the contributions from each wire.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1017
22 • Problems & Exercises 999
71. What current is needed in the top wire inFigure 76. Integrated Concepts
22.55(a) to produce a field of zero at the point To construct a nonmechanical water meter, a
equidistant from the wires, if the currents in the 0.500-T magnetic field is placed across the supply
bottom two wires are both 10.0 A into the page? water pipe to a home and the Hall voltage is
72. Calculate the size of the magnetic field 20 m recorded. (a) Find the flow rate in liters per second
below a high voltage power line. The line carries through a 3.00-cm-diameter pipe if the Hall
450 MW at a voltage of 300,000 V. voltage is 60.0 mV. (b) What would the Hall
73. Integrated Concepts voltage be for the same flow rate through a
(a) A pendulum is set up so that its bob (a thin 10.0-cm-diameter pipe with the same field
copper disk) swings between the poles of a applied?
permanent magnet as shown inFigure 22.60. 77. Integrated Concepts
What is the magnitude and direction of the (a) Using the values given for an MHD drive in
magnetic force on the bob at the lowest point in its Exercise 22.59, and assuming the force is
path, if it has a positive charge and is uniformly applied to the fluid, calculate the
released from a height of 30.0 cm above its lowest pressure created in (b) Is this a significant
point? The magnetic field strength is 1.50 T. (b) fraction of an atmosphere?
What is the acceleration of the bob at the bottom 78. Integrated Concepts
of its swing if its mass is 30.0 grams and it is hung (a) Calculate the maximum torque on a 50-turn,
from a flexible string? Be certain to include a free- 1.50 cm radius circular current loop carrying
body diagram as part of your analysis. in a 0.500-T field. (b) If this coil is to be
used in a galvanometer that reads full
scale, what force constant spring must be used, if
it is attached 1.00 cm from the axis of rotation and
is stretched by the arc moved?
79. Integrated Concepts
A current balance used to define the ampere is
designed so that the current through it is constant,
as is the distance between wires. Even so, if the
wires change length with temperature, the force
between them will change. What percent change
in force per degree will occur if the wires are
copper?
FIGURE22.60
74. Integrated Concepts
(a) What voltage will accelerate electrons to a
speed of ? (b) Find the radius of
curvature of the path of aprotonaccelerated
through this potential in a 0.500-T field and
compare this with the radius of curvature of an
electron accelerated through the same potential.
75. Integrated Concepts
Find the radius of curvature of the path of a
25.0-MeV proton moving perpendicularly to the
1.20-T field of a cyclotron.
PAGE: 1018
1000 22 • Problems & Exercises
80. Integrated Concepts 84. Integrated Concepts
(a) Show that the period of the circular orbit of a One long straight wire is to be held directly above
charged particle moving perpendicularly to a another by repulsion between their currents. The
uniform magnetic field is . (b) What lower wire carries 100 A and the wire 7.50 cm
is the frequency ? (c) What is the angular velocity above it is 10-gauge (2.588 mm diameter) copper
? Note that these results are independent of the wire. (a) What current must flow in the upper wire,
velocity and radius of the orbit and, hence, of the neglecting the Earth’s field? (b) What is the
energy of the particle. (Figure 22.61.) smallest current if the Earth’s field
is parallel to the ground and is not neglected? (c)
Is the supported wire in a stable or unstable
equilibrium if displaced vertically? If displaced
horizontally?
85. Unreasonable Results
(a) Find the charge on a baseball, thrown at 35.0
m/s perpendicular to the Earth’s
field, that experiences a 1.00-N magnetic force.
(b) What is unreasonable about this result? (c)
Which assumption or premise is responsible?
86. Unreasonable Results
A charged particle having mass
(that of a helium atom) moving at
FIGURE22.61Cyclotrons accelerate charged particles
perpendicular to a 1.50-T magnetic field travels in
orbiting in a magnetic field by placing an AC voltage on the
metal Dees, between which the particles move, so that a circular path of radius 16.0 mm. (a) What is the
energy is added twice each orbit. The frequency is constant,
charge of the particle? (b) What is unreasonable
since it is independent of the particle energy—the radius of
the orbit simply increases with energy until the particles about this result? (c) Which assumptions are
approach the edge and are extracted for various responsible?
experiments and applications.
87. Unreasonable Results
81. Integrated Concepts An inventor wants to generate 120-V power by
A cyclotron accelerates charged particles as moving a 1.00-m-long wire perpendicular to the
shown inFigure 22.61. Using the results of the Earth’s field. (a) Find the speed
previous problem, calculate the frequency of the with which the wire must move. (b) What is
accelerating voltage needed for a proton in a unreasonable about this result? (c) Which
1.20-T field. assumption is responsible?
82. Integrated Concepts 88. Unreasonable Results
(a) A 0.140-kg baseball, pitched at 40.0 m/s Frustrated by the small Hall voltage obtained in
horizontally and perpendicular to the Earth’s blood flow measurements, a medical physicist
horizontal field, has a 100-nC decides to increase the applied magnetic field
charge on it. What distance is it deflected from its strength to get a 0.500-V output for blood moving
path by the magnetic force, after traveling 30.0 m at 30.0 cm/s in a 1.50-cm-diameter vessel. (a)
horizontally? (b) Would you suggest this as a What magnetic field strength is needed? (b) What
secret technique for a pitcher to throw curve is unreasonable about this result? (c) Which
balls? premise is responsible?
83. Integrated Concepts 89. Unreasonable Results
(a) What is the direction of the force on a wire A surveyor 100 m from a long straight 200-kV DC
carrying a current due east in a location where the power line suspects that its magnetic field may
Earth’s field is due north? Both are parallel to the equal that of the Earth and affect compass
ground. (b) Calculate the force per meter if the readings. (a) Calculate the current in the wire
wire carries 20.0 A and the field strength is needed to create a field at this
. (c) What diameter copper wire distance. (b) What is unreasonable about this
would have its weight supported by this force? (d) result? (c) Which assumption or premise is
Calculate the resistance per meter and the voltage responsible?
per meter needed.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1019
22 • Problems & Exercises 1001
90. Construct Your Own Problem 91. Construct Your Own Problem
Consider a mass separator that applies a magnetic Consider using the torque on a current-carrying
field perpendicular to the velocity of ions and coil in a magnetic field to detect relatively small
separates the ions based on the radius of magnetic fields (less than the field of the Earth, for
curvature of their paths in the field. Construct a example). Construct a problem in which you
problem in which you calculate the magnetic field calculate the maximum torque on a current-
strength needed to separate two ions that differ in carrying loop in a magnetic field. Among the things
mass, but not charge, and have the same initial to be considered are the size of the coil, the
velocity. Among the things to consider are the number of loops it has, the current you pass
types of ions, the velocities they can be given through the coil, and the size of the field you wish
before entering the magnetic field, and a to detect. Discuss whether the torque produced is
reasonable value for the radius of curvature of the large enough to be effectively measured. Your
paths they follow. In addition, calculate the instructor may also wish for you to consider the
separation distance between the ions at the point effects, if any, of the field produced by the coil on
where they are detected. the surroundings that could affect detection of the
small field.
92. Critical ThinkingA magnetic field of
in the positivex-direction exists. Three electrons
pass through the origin, one at a time, each with a
velocity of . The first electron
passes the origin along thex-axis, the second
electron along they-axis, and the third at an angle
of with respect to both they- andz-axes in the
yz-plane. (a) What is the force acting on each
electron? (b) What is the shape of the path of each
electron? (c) When, if ever, will each electron
return to the origin?
PAGE: 1020
1002 22 • Problems & Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1021
CHAPTER 23
Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and
Electrical Technologies
FIGURE23.1These wind turbines in the Thames Estuary in the UK are an example of induction at work. Wind pushes the blades of the
turbine, spinning a shaft attached to magnets. The magnets spin around a conductive coil, inducing an electric current in the coil, and
eventually feeding the electrical grid. (credit: modification of work by Petr Kratochvil)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
23.1Induced Emf and Magnetic Flux
23.2Faraday’s Law of Induction: Lenz’s Law
23.3Motional Emf
23.4Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping
23.5Electric Generators
23.6Back Emf
23.7Transformers
23.8Electrical Safety: Systems and Devices
23.9Inductance
23.10RL Circuits
23.11Reactance, Inductive and Capacitive
23.12RLC Series AC Circuits
INTRODUCTION TO ELECTROMAGNETIC INDUCTION, AC CIRCUITS AND ELECTRICAL TECHNOLOGIES
Nature’s displays of symmetry are beautiful and alluring. A butterfly’s wings exhibit an appealing symmetry in a
complex system. (SeeFigure 23.2.) The laws of physics display symmetries at the most basic level—these
symmetries are a source of wonder and imply deeper meaning. Since we place a high value on symmetry, we look
for it when we explore nature. The remarkable thing is that we find it.
PAGE: 1022
1004 23 • Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and Electrical Technologies
FIGURE23.2Physics, like this butterfly, has inherent symmetries. (credit: Thomas Bresson)
The hint of symmetry between electricity and magnetism found in the preceding chapter will be elaborated upon in
this chapter. Specifically, we know that a current creates a magnetic field. If nature is symmetric here, then perhaps
a magnetic field can create a current. The Hall effect is a voltage caused by a magnetic force. That voltage could
drive a current. Historically, it was very shortly after Oersted discovered currents cause magnetic fields that other
scientists asked the following question: Can magnetic fields cause currents? The answer was soon found by
experiment to be yes. In 1831, some 12 years after Oersted’s discovery, the English scientist Michael Faraday
(1791–1862) and the American scientist Joseph Henry (1797–1878) independently demonstrated that magnetic
fields can produce currents. The basic process of generating emfs (electromotive force) and, hence, currents with
magnetic fields is known asinduction; this process is also called magnetic induction to distinguish it from charging
by induction, which utilizes the Coulomb force.
Today, currents induced by magnetic fields are essential to our technological society. The ubiquitous
generator—found in automobiles, on bicycles, in nuclear power plants, and so on—uses magnetism to generate
current. Other devices that use magnetism to induce currents include pickup coils in electric guitars, transformers of
every size, certain microphones, airport security gates, and damping mechanisms on sensitive chemical balances.
Not so familiar perhaps, but important nevertheless, is that the behavior of AC circuits depends strongly on the
effect of magnetic fields on currents.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/23-introduction-to-electromagnetic-
induction-ac-circuits-and-electrical-technologies)
23.1 Induced Emf and Magnetic Flux
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Calculate the flux of a uniform magnetic field through a loop of arbitrary orientation.
• Describe methods to produce an electromotive force (emf) with a magnetic field or magnet and a loop of
wire.
The apparatus used by Faraday to demonstrate that magnetic fields can create currents is illustrated inFigure 23.3.
When the switch is closed, a magnetic field is produced in the coil on the top part of the iron ring and transmitted to
the coil on the bottom part of the ring. The galvanometer is used to detect any current induced in the coil on the
bottom. It was found that each time the switch is closed, the galvanometer detects a current in one direction in the
coil on the bottom. (You can also observe this in a physics lab.) Each time the switch is opened, the galvanometer
detects a current in the opposite direction. Interestingly, if the switch remains closed or open for any length of time,
there is no current through the galvanometer.Closing and opening the switchinduces the current. It is thechangein
magnetic field that creates the current. More basic than the current that flows is theemfthat causes it. The current
is a result of anemf induced by a changing magnetic field, whether or not there is a path for current to flow.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1023
23.1 • Induced Emf and Magnetic Flux 1005
FIGURE23.3Faraday’s apparatus for demonstrating that a magnetic field can produce a current. A change in the field produced by the top
coil induces an emf and, hence, a current in the bottom coil. When the switch is opened and closed, the galvanometer registers currents in
opposite directions. No current flows through the galvanometer when the switch remains closed or open.
An experiment easily performed and often done in physics labs is illustrated inFigure 23.4. An emf is induced in the
coil when a bar magnet is pushed in and out of it. Emfs of opposite signs are produced by motion in opposite
directions, and the emfs are also reversed by reversing poles. The same results are produced if the coil is moved
rather than the magnet—it is the relative motion that is important. The faster the motion, the greater the emf, and
there is no emf when the magnet is stationary relative to the coil.
FIGURE23.4Movement of a magnet relative to a coil produces emfs as shown. The same emfs are produced if the coil is moved relative to
the magnet. The greater the speed, the greater the magnitude of the emf, and the emf is zero when there is no motion.
The method of inducing an emf used in most electric generators is shown inFigure 23.5. A coil is rotated in a
magnetic field, producing an alternating current emf, which depends on rotation rate and other factors that will be
explored in later sections. Note that the generator is remarkably similar in construction to a motor (another
symmetry).
PAGE: 1024
1006 23 • Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and Electrical Technologies
FIGURE23.5Rotation of a coil in a magnetic field produces an emf. This is the basic construction of a generator, where work done to turn
the coil is converted to electric energy. Note the generator is very similar in construction to a motor.
So we see that changing the magnitude or direction of a magnetic field produces an emf. Experiments revealed that
there is a crucial quantity called themagnetic flux, , given by
23.1
where is the magnetic field strength over an area , at an angle with the perpendicular to the area as shown in
Figure 23.6.Any change in magnetic flux induces an emf.This process is defined to beelectromagnetic
induction. Units of magnetic flux are . As seen inFigure 23.6, , which is the component of
⊥
perpendicular to the area . Thus magnetic flux is , the product of the area and the component of the
magnetic field perpendicular to it.
FIGURE23.6Magnetic flux is related to the magnetic field and the area over which it exists. The flux is related to
induction; any change in induces an emf.
All induction, including the examples given so far, arises from some change in magnetic flux . For example,
Faraday changed and hence when opening and closing the switch in his apparatus (shown inFigure 23.3). This
is also true for the bar magnet and coil shown inFigure 23.4. When rotating the coil of a generator, the angle and,
hence, is changed. Just how great an emf and what direction it takes depend on the change in and how rapidly
the change is made, as examined in the next section.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1025
23.2 • Faraday’s Law of Induction: Lenz’s Law 1007
23.2 Faraday’s Law of Induction: Lenz’s Law
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Calculate emf, current, and magnetic fields using Faraday’s Law.
• Explain the physical results of Lenz’s Law
Faraday’s and Lenz’s Law
Faraday’s experiments showed that the emf induced by a change in magnetic flux depends on only a few factors.
First, emf is directly proportional to the change in flux . Second, emf is greatest when the change in time is
smallest—that is, emf is inversely proportional to . Finally, if a coil has turns, an emf will be produced that is
times greater than for a single coil, so that emf is directly proportional to . The equation for the emf induced by a
change in magnetic flux is
23.2
This relationship is known asFaraday’s law of induction. The units for emf are volts, as is usual.
The minus sign in Faraday’s law of induction is very important. The minus means thatthe emf creates a current I
and magnetic field B that oppose the change in flux —this is known as Lenz’s law. The direction (given by the
minus sign) of the emfis so important that it is calledLenz’s lawafter the Russian Heinrich Lenz (1804–1865), who,
like Faraday and Henry,independently investigated aspects of induction. Faraday was aware of the direction, but
Lenz stated it so clearly that he is credited for its discovery. (SeeFigure 23.7.)
FIGURE23.7(a) When this bar magnet is thrust into the coil, the strength of the magnetic field increases in the coil. The current induced in
the coil creates another field, in the opposite direction of the bar magnet’s to oppose the increase. This is one aspect ofLenz’s
law—induction opposes any change in flux. (b) and (c) are two other situations. Verify for yourself that the direction of the induced
shown indeed opposes the change in flux and that the current direction shown is consistent with RHR-2.
Problem-Solving Strategy for Lenz’s Law
To use Lenz’s law to determine the directions of the induced magnetic fields, currents, and emfs:
1. Make a sketch of the situation for use in visualizing and recording directions.
2. Determine the direction of the magnetic field B.
3. Determine whether the flux is increasing or decreasing.
4. Now determine the direction of the induced magnetic field B. It opposes thechangein flux by adding or
PAGE: 1026
1008 23 • Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and Electrical Technologies
subtracting from the original field.
5. Use RHR-2 to determine the direction of the induced current I that is responsible for the induced magnetic
field B.
6. The direction (or polarity) of the induced emf will now drive a current in this direction and can be
represented as current emerging from the positive terminal of the emf and returning to its negative
terminal.
For practice, apply these steps to the situations shown inFigure 23.7and to others that are part of the following text
material.
Applications of Electromagnetic Induction
There are many applications of Faraday’s Law of induction, as we will explore in this chapter and others. At this
juncture, let us mention several that have to do with data storage and magnetic fields. A very important application
has to do with audio and videorecording tapes. A plastic tape, coated with iron oxide, moves past a recording head.
This recording head is basically a round iron ring about which is wrapped a coil of wire—an electromagnet (Figure
23.8). A signal in the form of a varying input current from a microphone or camera goes to the recording head. These
signals (which are a function of the signal amplitude and frequency) produce varying magnetic fields at the
recording head. As the tape moves past the recording head, the magnetic field orientations of the iron oxide
molecules on the tape are changed thus recording the signal. In the playback mode, the magnetized tape is run past
another head, similar in structure to the recording head. The different magnetic field orientations of the iron oxide
molecules on the tape induces an emf in the coil of wire in the playback head. This signal then is sent to a
loudspeaker or video player.
FIGURE23.8Recording and playback heads used with audio and video magnetic tapes. (credit: Steve Jurvetson)
Similar principles apply to computer hard drives, except at a much faster rate. Here recordings are on a coated,
spinning disk. Read heads historically were made to work on the principle of induction. However, the input
information is carried in digital rather than analog form – a series of 0’s or 1’s are written upon the spinning hard
drive. Today, most hard drive readout devices do not work on the principle of induction, but use a technique known
asgiant magnetoresistance. (The discovery that weak changes in a magnetic field in a thin film of iron and chromium
could bring about much larger changes in electrical resistance was one of the first large successes of
nanotechnology.) Another application of induction is found on the magnetic stripe on the back of your personal
credit card as used at the grocery store or the ATM machine. This works on the same principle as the audio or video
tape mentioned in the last paragraph in which a head reads personal information from your card.
Another application of electromagnetic induction is when electrical signals need to be transmitted across a barrier.
Consider thecochlear implantshown below. Sound is picked up by a microphone on the outside of the skull and is
used to set up a varying magnetic field. A current is induced in a receiver secured in the bone beneath the skin and
transmitted to electrodes in the inner ear. Electromagnetic induction can be used in other instances where electric
signals need to be conveyed across various media.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1027
23.2 • Faraday’s Law of Induction: Lenz’s Law 1009
FIGURE23.9Electromagnetic induction used in transmitting electric currents across mediums. The device on the baby’s head induces an
electrical current in a receiver secured in the bone beneath the skin. (credit: Bjorn Knetsch)
Another contemporary area of research in which electromagnetic induction is being successfully implemented (and
with substantial potential) is transcranial magnetic simulation. A host of disorders, including depression and
hallucinations can be traced to irregular localized electrical activity in the brain. Intranscranial magnetic
stimulation, a rapidly varying and very localized magnetic field is placed close to certain sites identified in the brain.
Weak electric currents are induced in the identified sites and can result in recovery of electrical functioning in the
brain tissue.
Sleep apnea(“the cessation of breath”) affects both adults and infants (especially premature babies and it may be a
cause of sudden infant deaths [SID]). In such individuals, breath can stop repeatedly during their sleep. A cessation
of more than 20 seconds can be very dangerous. Stroke, heart failure, and tiredness are just some of the possible
consequences for a person having sleep apnea. The concern in infants is the stopping of breath for these longer
times. One type of monitor to alert parents when a child is not breathing uses electromagnetic induction. A wire
wrapped around the infant’s chest has an alternating current running through it. The expansion and contraction of
the infant’s chest as the infant breathes changes the area through the coil. A pickup coil located nearby has an
alternating current induced in it due to the changing magnetic field of the initial wire. If the child stops breathing,
there will be a change in the induced current, and so a parent can be alerted.
Making Connections: Conservation of Energy
Lenz’s law is a manifestation of the conservation of energy. The induced emf produces a current that opposes
the change in flux, because a change in flux means a change in energy. Energy can enter or leave, but not
instantaneously. Lenz’s law is a consequence. As the change begins, the law says induction opposes and, thus,
slows the change. In fact, if the induced emf were in the same direction as the change in flux, there would be a
positive feedback that would give us free energy from no apparent source—conservation of energy would be
violated.
EXAMPLE 23.1
Calculating Emf: How Great Is the Induced Emf?
Calculate the magnitude of the induced emf when the magnet inFigure 23.7(a) is thrust into the coil, given the
following information: the single loop coil has a radius of 6.00 cm and the average value of (this is given,
since the bar magnet’s field is complex) increases from 0.0500 T to 0.250 T in 0.100 s.
Strategy
To find themagnitudeof emf, we use Faraday’s law of induction as stated by , but without the minus
sign that indicates direction:
23.3
Solution
We are given that and , but we must determine the change in flux before we can find emf.
PAGE: 1028
1010 23 • Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and Electrical Technologies
Since the area of the loop is fixed, we see that
23.4
Now , since it was given that changes from 0.0500 to 0.250 T. The area of the loop is
. Thus,
23.5
Entering the determined values into the expression for emf gives
23.6
Discussion
While this is an easily measured voltage, it is certainly not large enough for most practical applications. More loops
in the coil, a stronger magnet, and faster movement make induction the practical source of voltages that it is.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Faraday's Electromagnetic Lab
Play with a bar magnet and coils to learn about Faraday's law. Move a bar magnet near one or two coils to make a
light bulb glow. View the magnetic field lines. A meter shows the direction and magnitude of the current. View the
magnetic field lines or use a meter to show the direction and magnitude of the current. You can also play with
electromagnets, generators and transformers!
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/l/Faraday-EM-lab).
23.3 Motional Emf
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Calculate emf, force, magnetic field, and work due to the motion of an object in a magnetic field.
As we have seen, any change in magnetic flux induces an emf opposing that change—a process known as induction.
Motion is one of the major causes of induction. For example, a magnet moved toward a coil induces an emf, and a
coil moved toward a magnet produces a similar emf. In this section, we concentrate on motion in a magnetic field
that is stationary relative to the Earth, producing what is loosely calledmotional emf.
One situation where motional emf occurs is known as the Hall effect and has already been examined. Charges
moving in a magnetic field experience the magnetic force , which moves opposite charges in opposite
directions and produces an . We saw that the Hall effect has applications, including measurements of
and . We will now see that the Hall effect is one aspect of the broader phenomenon of induction, and we will find
that motional emf can be used as a power source.
Consider the situation shown inFigure 23.10. A rod is moved at a speed along a pair of conducting rails separated
by a distance in a uniform magnetic field . The rails are stationary relative to and are connected to a stationary
resistor . The resistor could be anything from a light bulb to a voltmeter. Consider the area enclosed by the moving
rod, rails, and resistor. is perpendicular to this area, and the area is increasing as the rod moves. Thus the
magnetic flux enclosed by the rails, rod, and resistor is increasing. When flux changes, an emf is induced according
to Faraday’s law of induction.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1029
23.3 • Motional Emf 1011
FIGURE23.10(a) A motional is induced between the rails when this rod moves to the right in the uniform magnetic field. The
magnetic field is into the page, perpendicular to the moving rod and rails and, hence, to the area enclosed by them. (b) Lenz’s law gives
the directions of the induced field and current, and the polarity of the induced emf. Since the flux is increasing, the induced field is in the
opposite direction, or out of the page. RHR-2 gives the current direction shown, and the polarity of the rod will drive such a current. RHR-1
also indicates the same polarity for the rod. (Note that the script E symbol used in the equivalent circuit at the bottom of part (b) represents
emf.)
To find the magnitude of emf induced along the moving rod, we use Faraday’s law of induction without the sign:
23.7
Here and below, “emf” implies the magnitude of the emf. In this equation, and the flux . We
have and , since is perpendicular to . Now , since is uniform. Note that
the area swept out by the rod is . Entering these quantities into the expression for emf yields
23.8
Finally, note that , the velocity of the rod. Entering this into the last expression shows that
23.9
is the motional emf. This is the same expression given for the Hall effect previously.
PAGE: 1030
1012 23 • Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and Electrical Technologies
Making Connections: Unification of Forces
There are many connections between the electric force and the magnetic force. The fact that a moving electric
field produces a magnetic field and, conversely, a moving magnetic field produces an electric field is part of why
electric and magnetic forces are now considered to be different manifestations of the same force. This classic
unification of electric and magnetic forces into what is called the electromagnetic force is the inspiration for
contemporary efforts to unify other basic forces.
To find the direction of the induced field, the direction of the current, and the polarity of the induced emf, we apply
Lenz’s law as explained inFaraday's Law of Induction: Lenz's Law. (SeeFigure 23.10(b).) Flux is increasing, since
the area enclosed is increasing. Thus the induced field must oppose the existing one and be out of the page. And so
the RHR-2 requires thatIbe counterclockwise, which in turn means the top of the rod is positive as shown.
Motional emf also occurs if the magnetic field moves and the rod (or other object) is stationary relative to the Earth
(or some observer). We have seen an example of this in the situation where a moving magnet induces an emf in a
stationary coil. It is the relative motion that is important. What is emerging in these observations is a connection
between magnetic and electric fields. A moving magnetic field produces an electric field through its induced emf.
We already have seen that a moving electric field produces a magnetic field—moving charge implies moving electric
field and moving charge produces a magnetic field.
Motional emfs in the Earth’s weak magnetic field are not ordinarily very large, or we would notice voltage along
metal rods, such as a screwdriver, during ordinary motions. For example, a simple calculation of the motional emf of
a 1 m rod moving at 3.0 m/s perpendicular to the Earth’s field gives
. This small value is consistent with experience. There is a
spectacular exception, however. In 1992 and 1996, attempts were made with the space shuttle to create large
motional emfs. The Tethered Satellite was to be let out on a 20 km length of wire as shown inFigure 23.11, to create
a 5 kV emf by moving at orbital speed through the Earth’s field. This emf could be used to convert some of the
shuttle’s kinetic and potential energy into electrical energy if a complete circuit could be made. To complete the
circuit, the stationary ionosphere was to supply a return path for the current to flow. (The ionosphere is the rarefied
and partially ionized atmosphere at orbital altitudes. It conducts because of the ionization. The ionosphere serves
the same function as the stationary rails and connecting resistor inFigure 23.10, without which there would not be a
complete circuit.) Drag on the current in the cable due to the magnetic force does the work that
reduces the shuttle’s kinetic and potential energy and allows it to be converted to electrical energy. The tests were
both unsuccessful. In the first, the cable hung up and could only be extended a couple of hundred meters; in the
second, the cable broke when almost fully extended.Example 23.2indicates feasibility in principle.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1031
23.4 • Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping 1013
EXAMPLE 23.2
Calculating the Large Motional Emf of an Object in Orbit
FIGURE23.11Motional emf as electrical power conversion for the space shuttle is the motivation for the Tethered Satellite experiment. A 5
kV emf was predicted to be induced in the 20 km long tether while moving at orbital speed in the Earth’s magnetic field. The circuit is
completed by a return path through the stationary ionosphere.
Calculate the motional emf induced along a 20.0 km long conductor moving at an orbital speed of 7.80 km/s
perpendicular to the Earth’s magnetic field.
Strategy
This is a straightforward application of the expression for motional emf— .
Solution
Entering the given values into gives
23.10
Discussion
The value obtained is greater than the 5 kV measured voltage for the shuttle experiment, since the actual orbital
motion of the tether is not perpendicular to the Earth’s field. The 7.80 kV value is the maximum emf obtained when
and .
23.4 Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the magnitude and direction of an induced eddy current, and the effect this will have on the
object it is induced in.
• Describe several applications of magnetic damping.
Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping
As discussed inMotional Emf, motional emf is induced when a conductor moves in a magnetic field or when a
magnetic field moves relative to a conductor. If motional emf can cause a current loop in the conductor, we refer to
PAGE: 1032
1014 23 • Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and Electrical Technologies
that current as aneddy current. Eddy currents can produce significant drag, calledmagnetic damping, on the
motion involved. Consider the apparatus shown inFigure 23.12, which swings a pendulum bob between the poles of
a strong magnet. (This is another favorite physics lab activity.) If the bob is metal, there is significant drag on the bob
as it enters and leaves the field, quickly damping the motion. If, however, the bob is a slotted metal plate, as shown
inFigure 23.12(b), there is a much smaller effect due to the magnet. There is no discernible effect on a bob made of
an insulator. Why is there drag in both directions, and are there any uses for magnetic drag?
FIGURE23.12A common physics demonstration device for exploring eddy currents and magnetic damping. (a) The motion of a metal
pendulum bob swinging between the poles of a magnet is quickly damped by the action of eddy currents. (b) There is little effect on the
motion of a slotted metal bob, implying that eddy currents are made less effective. (c) There is also no magnetic damping on a
nonconducting bob, since the eddy currents are extremely small.
Figure 23.13shows what happens to the metal plate as it enters and leaves the magnetic field. In both cases, it
experiences a force opposing its motion. As it enters from the left, flux increases, and so an eddy current is set up
(Faraday’s law) in the counterclockwise direction (Lenz’s law), as shown. Only the right-hand side of the current loop
is in the field, so that there is an unopposed force on it to the left (RHR-1). When the metal plate is completely inside
the field, there is no eddy current if the field is uniform, since the flux remains constant in this region. But when the
plate leaves the field on the right, flux decreases, causing an eddy current in the clockwise direction that, again,
experiences a force to the left, further slowing the motion. A similar analysis of what happens when the plate swings
from the right toward the left shows that its motion is also damped when entering and leaving the field.
FIGURE23.13A more detailed look at the conducting plate passing between the poles of a magnet. As it enters and leaves the field, the
change in flux produces an eddy current. Magnetic force on the current loop opposes the motion. There is no current and no magnetic drag
when the plate is completely inside the uniform field.
When a slotted metal plate enters the field, as shown inFigure 23.14, an emf is induced by the change in flux, but it
is less effective because the slots limit the size of the current loops. Moreover, adjacent loops have currents in
opposite directions, and their effects cancel. When an insulating material is used, the eddy current is extremely
small, and so magnetic damping on insulators is negligible. If eddy currents are to be avoided in conductors, then
they can be slotted or constructed of thin layers of conducting material separated by insulating sheets.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1033
23.4 • Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping 1015
FIGURE23.14Eddy currents induced in a slotted metal plate entering a magnetic field form small loops, and the forces on them tend to
cancel, thereby making magnetic drag almost zero.
Applications of Magnetic Damping
One use of magnetic damping is found in sensitive laboratory balances. To have maximum sensitivity and accuracy,
the balance must be as friction-free as possible. But if it is friction-free, then it will oscillate for a very long time.
Magnetic damping is a simple and ideal solution. With magnetic damping, drag is proportional to speed and
becomes zero at zero velocity. Thus the oscillations are quickly damped, after which the damping force disappears,
allowing the balance to be very sensitive. (SeeFigure 23.15.) In most balances, magnetic damping is accomplished
with a conducting disc that rotates in a fixed field.
FIGURE23.15Magnetic damping of this sensitive balance slows its oscillations. Since Faraday’s law of induction gives the greatest effect
for the most rapid change, damping is greatest for large oscillations and goes to zero as the motion stops.
Since eddy currents and magnetic damping occur only in conductors, recycling centers can use magnets to separate
metals from other materials. Trash is dumped in batches down a ramp, beneath which lies a powerful magnet.
Conductors in the trash are slowed by magnetic damping while nonmetals in the trash move on, separating from the
metals. (SeeFigure 23.16.) This works for all metals, not just ferromagnetic ones. A magnet can separate out the
ferromagnetic materials alone by acting on stationary trash.
PAGE: 1034
1016 23 • Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and Electrical Technologies
FIGURE23.16Metals can be separated from other trash by magnetic drag. Eddy currents and magnetic drag are created in the metals sent
down this ramp by the powerful magnet beneath it. Nonmetals move on.
Other major applications of eddy currents are in metal detectors and braking systems in trains and roller coasters.
Portable metal detectors (Figure 23.17) consist of a primary coil carrying an alternating current and a secondary coil
in which a current is induced. An eddy current will be induced in a piece of metal close to the detector which will
cause a change in the induced current within the secondary coil, leading to some sort of signal like a shrill noise.
Braking using eddy currents is safer because factors such as rain do not affect the braking and the braking is
smoother. However, eddy currents cannot bring the motion to a complete stop, since the force produced decreases
with speed. Thus, speed can be reduced from say 20 m/s to 5 m/s, but another form of braking is needed to
completely stop the vehicle. Generally, powerful rare earth magnets such as neodymium magnets are used in roller
coasters.Figure 23.18shows rows of magnets in such an application. The vehicle has metal fins (normally
containing copper) which pass through the magnetic field slowing the vehicle down in much the same way as with
the pendulum bob shown inFigure 23.12.
FIGURE23.17A soldier uses a metal detector to search for explosives and weapons. (credit: U.S. Army)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1035
23.5 • Electric Generators 1017
FIGURE23.18The rows of rare earth magnets (protruding horizontally) are used for magnetic braking in roller coasters. (credit: Stefan
Scheer, Wikimedia Commons)
Induction cooktops have electromagnets under their surface. The magnetic field is varied rapidly producing eddy
currents in the base of the pot, causing the pot and its contents to increase in temperature. Induction cooktops have
high efficiencies and good response times but the base of the pot needs to be ferromagnetic, iron or steel for
induction to work.
23.5 Electric Generators
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Calculate the emf induced in a generator.
• Calculate the peak emf which can be induced in a particular generator system.
Electric generatorsinduce an emf by rotating a coil in a magnetic field, as briefly discussed inInduced Emf and
Magnetic Flux. We will now explore generators in more detail. Consider the following example.
EXAMPLE 23.3
Calculating the Emf Induced in a Generator Coil
The generator coil shown inFigure 23.19is rotated through one-fourth of a revolution (from to ) in
15.0 ms. The 200-turn circular coil has a 5.00 cm radius and is in a uniform 1.25 T magnetic field. What is the
average emf induced?
PAGE: 1036
1018 23 • Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and Electrical Technologies
FIGURE23.19When this generator coil is rotated through one-fourth of a revolution, the magnetic flux changes from its maximum to
zero, inducing an emf.
Strategy
We use Faraday’s law of induction to find the average emf induced over a time :
23.11
We know that and , and so we must determine the change in flux to find emf.
Solution
Since the area of the loop and the magnetic field strength are constant, we see that
23.12
Now, , since it was given that goes from to . Thus , and
23.13
The area of the loop is . Entering this value gives
23.14
Discussion
This is a practical average value, similar to the 120 V used in household power.
The emf calculated inExample 23.3is the average over one-fourth of a revolution. What is the emf at any given
instant? It varies with the angle between the magnetic field and a perpendicular to the coil. We can get an
expression for emf as a function of time by considering the motional emf on a rotating rectangular coil of width
and height in a uniform magnetic field, as illustrated inFigure 23.20.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1037
23.5 • Electric Generators 1019
FIGURE23.20A generator with a single rectangular coil rotated at constant angular velocity in a uniform magnetic field produces an emf
that varies sinusoidally in time. Note the generator is similar to a motor, except the shaft is rotated to produce a current rather than the
other way around.
Charges in the wires of the loop experience the magnetic force, because they are moving in a magnetic field.
Charges in the vertical wires experience forces parallel to the wire, causing currents. But those in the top and
bottom segments feel a force perpendicular to the wire, which does not cause a current. We can thus find the
induced emf by considering only the side wires. Motional emf is given to be , where the velocityvis
perpendicular to the magnetic field . Here the velocity is at an angle with , so that its component perpendicular
to is (seeFigure 23.20). Thus in this case the emf induced on each side is , and they are
in the same direction. The total emf around the loop is then
23.15
This expression is valid, but it does not give emf as a function of time. To find the time dependence of emf, we
assume the coil rotates at a constant angular velocity . The angle is related to angular velocity by , so that
23.16
Now, linear velocity is related to angular velocity by . Here , so that , and
23.17
Noting that the area of the loop is , and allowing for loops, we find that
23.18
is theemf induced in a generator coilof turns and area rotating at a constant angular velocity in a uniform
magnetic field . This can also be expressed as
23.19
where
23.20
is the maximum(peak) emf. Note that the frequency of the oscillation is , and the period is
.Figure 23.21shows a graph of emf as a function of time, and it now seems reasonable that AC
voltage is sinusoidal.
PAGE: 1038
1020 23 • Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and Electrical Technologies
FIGURE23.21The emf of a generator is sent to a light bulb with the system of rings and brushes shown. The graph gives the emf of the
generator as a function of time. is the peak emf. The period is , where is the frequency. Note that the script E
stands for emf.
The fact that the peak emf, , makes good sense. The greater the number of coils, the larger their
area, and the stronger the field, the greater the output voltage. It is interesting that the faster the generator is spun
(greater ), the greater the emf. This is noticeable on bicycle generators—at least the cheaper varieties. One of the
authors as a juvenile found it amusing to ride his bicycle fast enough to burn out his lights, until he had to ride home
lightless one dark night.
Figure 23.22shows a scheme by which a generator can be made to produce pulsed DC. More elaborate
arrangements of multiple coils and split rings can produce smoother DC, although electronic rather than mechanical
means are usually used to make ripple-free DC.
FIGURE23.22Split rings, called commutators, produce a pulsed DC emf output in this configuration.
EXAMPLE 23.4
Calculating the Maximum Emf of a Generator
Calculate the maximum emf, , of the generator that was the subject ofExample 23.3.
Strategy
Once , the angular velocity, is determined, can be used to find . All other quantities are
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1039
23.6 • Back Emf 1021
known.
Solution
Angular velocity is defined to be the change in angle per unit time:
23.21
One-fourth of a revolution is radians, and the time is 0.0150 s; thus,
23.22
104.7 rad/s is exactly 1000 rpm. We substitute this value for and the information from the previous example into
, yielding
23.23
Discussion
The maximum emf is greater than the average emf of 131 V found in the previous example, as it should be.
In real life, electric generators look a lot different than the figures in this section, but the principles are the same.
The source of mechanical energy that turns the coil can be falling water (hydropower), steam produced by the
burning of fossil fuels, or the kinetic energy of wind.Figure 23.23shows a cutaway view of a steam turbine; steam
moves over the blades connected to the shaft, which rotates the coil within the generator.
FIGURE23.23Steam turbine/generator. The steam produced by burning coal impacts the turbine blades, turning the shaft which is
connected to the generator. (credit: Nabonaco, Wikimedia Commons)
Generators illustrated in this section look very much like the motors illustrated previously. This is not coincidental.
In fact, a motor becomes a generator when its shaft rotates. Certain early automobiles used their starter motor as a
generator. InBack Emf, we shall further explore the action of a motor as a generator.
23.6 Back Emf
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain what back emf is and how it is induced.
It has been noted that motors and generators are very similar. Generators convert mechanical energy into electrical
energy, whereas motors convert electrical energy into mechanical energy. Furthermore, motors and generators have
the same construction. When the coil of a motor is turned, magnetic flux changes, and an emf (consistent with
Faraday’s law of induction) is induced. The motor thus acts as a generator whenever its coil rotates. This will happen
PAGE: 1040
1022 23 • Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and Electrical Technologies
whether the shaft is turned by an external input, like a belt drive, or by the action of the motor itself. That is, when a
motor is doing work and its shaft is turning, an emf is generated. Lenz’s law tells us the emf opposes any change, so
that the input emf that powers the motor will be opposed by the motor’s self-generated emf, called theback emfof
the motor. (SeeFigure 23.24.)
FIGURE23.24The coil of a DC motor is represented as a resistor in this schematic. The back emf is represented as a variable emf that
opposes the one driving the motor. Back emf is zero when the motor is not turning, and it increases proportionally to the motor’s angular
velocity.
Back emf is the generator output of a motor, and so it is proportional to the motor’s angular velocity . It is zero
when the motor is first turned on, meaning that the coil receives the full driving voltage and the motor draws
maximum current when it is on but not turning. As the motor turns faster and faster, the back emf grows, always
opposing the driving emf, and reduces the voltage across the coil and the amount of current it draws. This effect is
noticeable in a number of situations. When a vacuum cleaner, refrigerator, or washing machine is first turned on,
lights in the same circuit dim briefly due to the drop produced in feeder lines by the large current drawn by the
motor. When a motor first comes on, it draws more current than when it runs at its normal operating speed. When a
mechanical load is placed on the motor, like an electric wheelchair going up a hill, the motor slows, the back emf
drops, more current flows, and more work can be done. If the motor runs at too low a speed, the larger current can
overheat it (via resistive power in the coil, ), perhaps even burning it out. On the other hand, if there is no
mechanical load on the motor, it will increase its angular velocity until the back emf is nearly equal to the driving
emf. Then the motor uses only enough energy to overcome friction.
Consider, for example, the motor coils represented inFigure 23.24. The coils have a equivalent resistance
and are driven by a 48.0 V emf. Shortly after being turned on, they draw a current
and, thus, dissipate of energy as heat transfer.
Under normal operating conditions for this motor, suppose the back emf is 40.0 V. Then at operating speed, the total
voltage across the coils is 8.0 V (48.0 V minus the 40.0 V back emf), and the current drawn is
. Under normal load, then, the power dissipated is
. The latter will not cause a problem for this motor, whereas the former 5.76 kW
would burn out the coils if sustained.
23.7 Transformers
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain how a transformer works.
• Calculate voltage, current, and/or number of turns given the other quantities.
Transformersdo what their name implies—they transform voltages from one value to another (The term voltage is
used rather than emf, because transformers have internal resistance). For example, many cell phones, laptops,
video games, and power tools and small appliances have a transformer built into their plug-in unit (like that inFigure
23.25) that changes 120 V or 240 V AC into whatever voltage the device uses. Transformers are also used at several
points in the power distribution systems, such as illustrated inFigure 23.26. Power is sent long distances at high
voltages, because less current is required for a given amount of power, and this means less line loss, as was
discussed previously. But high voltages pose greater hazards, so that transformers are employed to produce lower
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1041
23.7 • Transformers 1023
voltage at the user’s location.
FIGURE23.25The plug-in transformer has become increasingly familiar with the proliferation of electronic devices that operate on
voltages other than common 120 V AC. Most are in the 3 to 12 V range. (credit: Shop Xtreme)
FIGURE23.26Transformers change voltages at several points in a power distribution system. Electric power is usually generated at greater
than 10 kV, and transmitted long distances at voltages over 200 kV—sometimes as great as 700 kV—to limit energy losses. Local power
distribution to neighborhoods or industries goes through a substation and is sent short distances at voltages ranging from 5 to 13 kV. This is
reduced to 120, 240, or 480 V for safety at the individual user site.
The type of transformer considered in this text—seeFigure 23.27—is based on Faraday’s law of induction and is very
similar in construction to the apparatus Faraday used to demonstrate magnetic fields could cause currents. The two
coils are called theprimaryandsecondary coils. In normal use, the input voltage is placed on the primary, and the
secondary produces the transformed output voltage. Not only does the iron core trap the magnetic field created by
the primary coil, its magnetization increases the field strength. Since the input voltage is AC, a time-varying
magnetic flux is sent to the secondary, inducing its AC output voltage.
PAGE: 1042
1024 23 • Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and Electrical Technologies
FIGURE23.27A typical construction of a simple transformer has two coils wound on a ferromagnetic core that is laminated to minimize
eddy currents. The magnetic field created by the primary is mostly confined to and increased by the core, which transmits it to the
secondary coil. Any change in current in the primary induces a current in the secondary.
For the simple transformer shown inFigure 23.27, the output voltage depends almost entirely on the input
voltage and the ratio of the number of loops in the primary and secondary coils. Faraday’s law of induction for the
secondary coil gives its induced output voltage to be
23.24
where is the number of loops in the secondary coil and / is the rate of change of magnetic flux. Note that
the output voltage equals the induced emf ( ), provided coil resistance is small (a reasonable assumption
for transformers). The cross-sectional area of the coils is the same on either side, as is the magnetic field strength,
and so is the same on either side. The input primary voltage is also related to changing flux by
23.25
The reason for this is a little more subtle. Lenz’s law tells us that the primary coil opposes the change in flux caused
by the input voltage , hence the minus sign (This is an example ofself-inductance, a topic to be explored in some
detail in later sections). Assuming negligible coil resistance, Kirchhoff’s loop rule tells us that the induced emf
exactly equals the input voltage. Taking the ratio of these last two equations yields a useful relationship:
23.26
This is known as thetransformer equation, and it simply states that the ratio of the secondary to primary voltages
in a transformer equals the ratio of the number of loops in their coils.
The output voltage of a transformer can be less than, greater than, or equal to the input voltage, depending on the
ratio of the number of loops in their coils. Some transformers even provide a variable output by allowing connection
to be made at different points on the secondary coil. Astep-up transformeris one that increases voltage, whereas
astep-down transformerdecreases voltage. Assuming, as we have, that resistance is negligible, the electrical
power output of a transformer equals its input. This is nearly true in practice—transformer efficiency often exceeds
99%. Equating the power input and output,
23.27
Rearranging terms gives
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1043
23.7 • Transformers 1025
23.28
Combining this with , we find that
23.29
is the relationship between the output and input currents of a transformer. So if voltage increases, current
decreases. Conversely, if voltage decreases, current increases.
EXAMPLE 23.5
Calculating Characteristics of a Step-Up Transformer
A portable x-ray unit has a step-up transformer, the 120 V input of which is transformed to the 100 kV output
needed by the x-ray tube. The primary has 50 loops and draws a current of 10.00 A when in use. (a) What is the
number of loops in the secondary? (b) Find the current output of the secondary.
Strategy and Solution for (a)
We solve for , the number of loops in the secondary, and enter the known values. This gives
23.30
Discussion for (a)
A large number of loops in the secondary (compared with the primary) is required to produce such a large voltage.
This would be true for neon sign transformers and those supplying high voltage inside TVs and CRTs.
Strategy and Solution for (b)
We can similarly find the output current of the secondary by solving for and entering known values.
This gives
23.31
Discussion for (b)
As expected, the current output is significantly less than the input. In certain spectacular demonstrations, very large
voltages are used to produce long arcs, but they are relatively safe because the transformer output does not supply
a large current. Note that the power input here is . This equals the power
output , as we assumed in the derivation of the equations used.
The fact that transformers are based on Faraday’s law of induction makes it clear why we cannot use transformers
to change DC voltages. If there is no change in primary voltage, there is no voltage induced in the secondary. One
possibility is to connect DC to the primary coil through a switch. As the switch is opened and closed, the secondary
produces a voltage like that inFigure 23.28. This is not really a practical alternative, and AC is in common use
wherever it is necessary to increase or decrease voltages.
PAGE: 1044
1026 23 • Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and Electrical Technologies
FIGURE23.28Transformers do not work for pure DC voltage input, but if it is switched on and off as on the top graph, the output will look
something like that on the bottom graph. This is not the sinusoidal AC most AC appliances need.
EXAMPLE 23.6
Calculating Characteristics of a Step-Down Transformer
A battery charger meant for a series connection of ten nickel-cadmium batteries (total emf of 12.5 V DC) needs to
have a 15.0 V output to charge the batteries. It uses a step-down transformer with a 200-loop primary and a 120 V
input. (a) How many loops should there be in the secondary coil? (b) If the charging current is 16.0 A, what is the
input current?
Strategy and Solution for (a)
You would expect the secondary to have a small number of loops. Solving for and entering known
values gives
23.32
Strategy and Solution for (b)
The current input can be obtained by solving for and entering known values. This gives
23.33
Discussion
The number of loops in the secondary is small, as expected for a step-down transformer. We also see that a small
input current produces a larger output current in a step-down transformer. When transformers are used to operate
large magnets, they sometimes have a small number of very heavy loops in the secondary. This allows the
secondary to have low internal resistance and produce large currents. Note again that this solution is based on the
assumption of 100% efficiency—or power out equals power in ( )—reasonable for good transformers. In this
case the primary and secondary power is 240 W. (Verify this for yourself as a consistency check.) Note that the Ni-
Cd batteries need to be charged from a DC power source (as would a 12 V battery). So the AC output of the
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1045
23.8 • Electrical Safety: Systems and Devices 1027
secondary coil needs to be converted into DC. This is done using something called a rectifier, which uses devices
called diodes that allow only a one-way flow of current.
Transformers have many applications in electrical safety systems, which are discussed inElectrical Safety: Systems
and Devices.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Generator
Generate electricity with a bar magnet! Discover the physics behind the phenomena by exploring magnets and how
you can use them to make a bulb light.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/l/28gen).
23.8 Electrical Safety: Systems and Devices
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain how various modern safety features in electric circuits work, with an emphasis on how induction
is employed.
Electricity has two hazards. Athermal hazardoccurs when there is electrical overheating. Ashock hazardoccurs
when electric current passes through a person. Both hazards have already been discussed. Here we will concentrate
on systems and devices that prevent electrical hazards.
Figure 23.29shows the schematic for a simple AC circuit with no safety features. This is not how power is
distributed in practice. Modern household and industrial wiring requires thethree-wire system, shown
schematically inFigure 23.30, which has several safety features. First is the familiarcircuit breaker(orfuse) to
prevent thermal overload. Second, there is a protectivecasearound the appliance, such as a toaster or refrigerator.
The case’s safety feature is that it prevents a person from touching exposed wires and coming into electrical contact
with the circuit, helping prevent shocks.
FIGURE23.29Schematic of a simple AC circuit with a voltage source and a single appliance represented by the resistance . There are no
safety features in this circuit.
PAGE: 1046
1028 23 • Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and Electrical Technologies
FIGURE23.30The three-wire system connects the neutral wire to the earth at the voltage source and user location, forcing it to be at zero
volts and supplying an alternative return path for the current through the earth. Also grounded to zero volts is the case of the appliance. A
circuit breaker or fuse protects against thermal overload and is in series on the active (live/hot) wire. Note that wire insulation colors vary
with region and it is essential to check locally to determine which color codes are in use (and even if they were followed in the particular
installation).
There arethree connections to earth or ground(hereafter referred to as “earth/ground”) shown inFigure 23.30.
Recall that an earth/ground connection is a low-resistance path directly to the earth. The two earth/ground
connections on theneutral wireforce it to be at zero volts relative to the earth, giving the wire its name. This wire is
therefore safe to touch even if its insulation, usually white, is missing. The neutral wire is the return path for the
current to follow to complete the circuit. Furthermore, the two earth/ground connections supply an alternative path
through the earth, a good conductor, to complete the circuit. The earth/ground connection closest to the power
source could be at the generating plant, while the other is at the user’s location. The third earth/ground is to the
case of the appliance, through the greenearth/ground wire, forcing the case, too, to be at zero volts. Theliveorhot
wire(hereafter referred to as “live/hot”) supplies voltage and current to operate the appliance.Figure 23.31shows
a more pictorial version of how the three-wire system is connected through a three-prong plug to an appliance.
FIGURE23.31The standard three-prong plug can only be inserted in one way, to assure proper function of the three-wire system.
A note on insulation color-coding: Insulating plastic is color-coded to identify live/hot, neutral and ground wires but
these codes vary around the world. Live/hot wires may be brown, red, black, blue or grey. Neutral wire may be blue,
black or white. Since the same color may be used for live/hot or neutral in different parts of the world, it is essential
to determine the color code in your region. The only exception is the earth/ground wire which is often green but may
be yellow or just bare wire. Striped coatings are sometimes used for the benefit of those who are colorblind.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1047
23.8 • Electrical Safety: Systems and Devices 1029
The three-wire system replaced the older two-wire system, which lacks an earth/ground wire. Under ordinary
circumstances, insulation on the live/hot and neutral wires prevents the case from being directly in the circuit, so
that the earth/ground wire may seem like double protection. Grounding the case solves more than one problem,
however. The simplest problem is worn insulation on the live/hot wire that allows it to contact the case, as shown in
Figure 23.32. Lacking an earth/ground connection (some people cut the third prong off the plug because they only
have outdated two hole receptacles), a severe shock is possible. This is particularly dangerous in the kitchen, where
a good connection to earth/ground is available through water on the floor or a water faucet. With the earth/ground
connection intact, the circuit breaker will trip, forcing repair of the appliance. Why are some appliances still sold with
two-prong plugs? These have nonconducting cases, such as power tools with impact resistant plastic cases, and are
calleddoubly insulated. Modern two-prong plugs can be inserted into the asymmetric standard outlet in only one
way, to ensure proper connection of live/hot and neutral wires.
FIGURE23.32Worn insulation allows the live/hot wire to come into direct contact with the metal case of this appliance. (a) The earth/
ground connection being broken, the person is severely shocked. The appliance may operate normally in this situation. (b) With a proper
earth/ground, the circuit breaker trips, forcing repair of the appliance.
Electromagnetic induction causes a more subtle problem that is solved by grounding the case. The AC current in
appliances can induce an emf on the case. If grounded, the case voltage is kept near zero, but if the case is not
grounded, a shock can occur as pictured inFigure 23.33. Current driven by the induced case emf is called aleakage
PAGE: 1048
1030 23 • Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and Electrical Technologies
current, although current does not necessarily pass from the resistor to the case.
FIGURE23.33AC currents can induce an emf on the case of an appliance. The voltage can be large enough to cause a shock. If the case is
grounded, the induced emf is kept near zero.
Aground fault interrupter(GFI) is a safety device found in updated kitchen and bathroom wiring that works based
on electromagnetic induction. GFIs compare the currents in the live/hot and neutral wires. When live/hot and
neutral currents are not equal, it is almost always because current in the neutral is less than in the live/hot wire.
Then some of the current, again called a leakage current, is returning to the voltage source by a path other than
through the neutral wire. It is assumed that this path presents a hazard, such as shown inFigure 23.34. GFIs are
usually set to interrupt the circuit if the leakage current is greater than 5 mA, the accepted maximum harmless
shock. Even if the leakage current goes safely to earth/ground through an intact earth/ground wire, the GFI will trip,
forcing repair of the leakage.
FIGURE23.34A ground fault interrupter (GFI) compares the currents in the live/hot and neutral wires and will trip if their difference
exceeds a safe value. The leakage current here follows a hazardous path that could have been prevented by an intact earth/ground wire.
Figure 23.35shows how a GFI works. If the currents in the live/hot and neutral wires are equal, then they induce
equal and opposite emfs in the coil. If not, then the circuit breaker will trip.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1049
23.9 • Inductance 1031
FIGURE23.35A GFI compares currents by using both to induce an emf in the same coil. If the currents are equal, they will induce equal
but opposite emfs.
Another induction-based safety device is theisolation transformer, shown inFigure 23.36. Most isolation
transformers have equal input and output voltages. Their function is to put a large resistance between the original
voltage source and the device being operated. This prevents a complete circuit between them, even in the
circumstance shown. There is a complete circuit through the appliance. But there is not a complete circuit for
current to flow through the person in the figure, who is touching only one of the transformer’s output wires, and
neither output wire is grounded. The appliance is isolated from the original voltage source by the high resistance of
the material between the transformer coils, hence the name isolation transformer. For current to flow through the
person, it must pass through the high-resistance material between the coils, through the wire, the person, and back
through the earth—a path with such a large resistance that the current is negligible.
FIGURE23.36An isolation transformer puts a large resistance between the original voltage source and the device, preventing a complete
circuit between them.
The basics of electrical safety presented here help prevent many electrical hazards. Electrical safety can be pursued
to greater depths. There are, for example, problems related to different earth/ground connections for appliances in
close proximity. Many other examples are found in hospitals. Microshock-sensitive patients, for instance, require
special protection. For these people, currents as low as 0.1 mA may cause ventricular fibrillation. The interested
reader can use the material presented here as a basis for further study.
23.9 Inductance
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Calculate the inductance of an inductor.
• Calculate the energy stored in an inductor.
• Calculate the emf generated in an inductor.
Inductors
Induction is the process in which an emf is induced by changing magnetic flux. Many examples have been discussed
so far, some more effective than others. Transformers, for example, are designed to be particularly effective at
PAGE: 1050
1032 23 • Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and Electrical Technologies
inducing a desired voltage and current with very little loss of energy to other forms. Is there a useful physical
quantity related to how “effective” a given device is? The answer is yes, and that physical quantity is called
inductance.
Mutual inductanceis the effect of Faraday’s law of induction for one device upon another, such as the primary coil
in transmitting energy to the secondary in a transformer. SeeFigure 23.37, where simple coils induce emfs in one
another.
FIGURE23.37These coils can induce emfs in one another like an inefficient transformer. Their mutual inductance M indicates the
effectiveness of the coupling between them. Here a change in current in coil 1 is seen to induce an emf in coil 2. (Note that " induced"
represents the induced emf in coil 2.)
In the many cases where the geometry of the devices is fixed, flux is changed by varying current. We therefore
concentrate on the rate of change of current, , as the cause of induction. A change in the current in one
device, coil 1 in the figure, induces an in the other. We express this in equation form as
23.34
where is defined to be the mutual inductance between the two devices. The minus sign is an expression of Lenz’s
law. The larger the mutual inductance , the more effective the coupling. For example, the coils inFigure 23.37
have a small compared with the transformer coils inFigure 23.27. Units for are , which is
named ahenry(H), after Joseph Henry. That is, .
Nature is symmetric here. If we change the current in coil 2, we induce an in coil 1, which is given by
23.35
where is the same as for the reverse process. Transformers run backward with the same effectiveness, or mutual
inductance .
A large mutual inductance may or may not be desirable. We want a transformer to have a large mutual
inductance. But an appliance, such as an electric clothes dryer, can induce a dangerous emf on its case if the mutual
inductance between its coils and the case is large. One way to reduce mutual inductance is to counterwind coils
to cancel the magnetic field produced. (SeeFigure 23.38.)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1051
23.9 • Inductance 1033
FIGURE23.38The heating coils of an electric clothes dryer can be counter-wound so that their magnetic fields cancel one another, greatly
reducing the mutual inductance with the case of the dryer.
Self-inductance, the effect of Faraday’s law of induction of a device on itself, also exists. When, for example,
current through a coil is increased, the magnetic field and flux also increase, inducing a counter emf, as required by
Lenz’s law. Conversely, if the current is decreased, an emf is induced that opposes the decrease. Most devices have
a fixed geometry, and so the change in flux is due entirely to the change in current through the device. The
induced emf is related to the physical geometry of the device and the rate of change of current. It is given by
23.36
where is the self-inductance of the device. A device that exhibits significant self-inductance is called aninductor,
and given the symbol inFigure 23.39.
FIGURE23.39
The minus sign is an expression of Lenz’s law, indicating that emf opposes the change in current. Units of self-
inductance are henries (H) just as for mutual inductance. The larger the self-inductance of a device, the greater its
opposition to any change in current through it. For example, a large coil with many turns and an iron core has a large
and will not allow current to change quickly. To avoid this effect, a small must be achieved, such as by
counterwinding coils as inFigure 23.38.
A 1 H inductor is a large inductor. To illustrate this, consider a device with that has a 10 A current flowing
through it. What happens if we try to shut off the current rapidly, perhaps in only 1.0 ms? An emf, given by
, will oppose the change. Thus an emf will be induced given by
. The positive sign means this large voltage is in the
same direction as the current, opposing its decrease. Such large emfs can cause arcs, damaging switching
equipment, and so it may be necessary to change current more slowly.
There are uses for such a large induced voltage. Camera flashes use a battery, two inductors that function as a
transformer, and a switching system or oscillator to induce large voltages. (Remember that we need a changing
magnetic field, brought about by a changing current, to induce a voltage in another coil.) The oscillator system will
do this many times as the battery voltage is boosted to over one thousand volts. (You may hear the high pitched
whine from the transformer as the capacitor is being charged.) A capacitor stores the high voltage for later use in
powering the flash. (SeeFigure 23.40.)
PAGE: 1052
1034 23 • Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and Electrical Technologies
FIGURE23.40Through rapid switching of an inductor, 1.5 V batteries can be used to induce emfs of several thousand volts. This voltage
can be used to store charge in a capacitor for later use, such as in a camera flash attachment.
It is possible to calculate for an inductor given its geometry (size and shape) and knowing the magnetic field that
it produces. This is difficult in most cases, because of the complexity of the field created. So in this text the
inductance is usually a given quantity. One exception is the solenoid, because it has a very uniform field inside, a
nearly zero field outside, and a simple shape. It is instructive to derive an equation for its inductance. We start by
noting that the induced emf is given by Faraday’s law of induction as and, by the definition of
self-inductance, as . Equating these yields
23.37
Solving for gives
23.38
This equation for the self-inductance of a device is always valid. It means that self-inductance depends on how
effective the current is in creating flux; the more effective, the greater / is.
Let us use this last equation to find an expression for the inductance of a solenoid. Since the area of a solenoid is
fixed, the change in flux is . To find , we note that the magnetic field of a solenoid is given
by . (Here , where is the number of coils and is the solenoid’s length.) Only the
current changes, so that . Substituting into gives
23.39
This simplifies to
23.40
This is the self-inductance of a solenoid of cross-sectional area and length . Note that the inductance depends
only on the physical characteristics of the solenoid, consistent with its definition.
EXAMPLE 23.7
Calculating the Self-inductance of a Moderate Size Solenoid
Calculate the self-inductance of a 10.0 cm long, 4.00 cm diameter solenoid that has 200 coils.
Strategy
This is a straightforward application of , since all quantities in the equation except are known.
Solution
Use the following expression for the self-inductance of a solenoid:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1053
23.9 • Inductance 1035
23.41
The cross-sectional area in this example is , is given to be
200, and the length is 0.100 m. We know the permeability of free space is . Substituting
these into the expression for gives
23.42
Discussion
This solenoid is moderate in size. Its inductance of nearly a millihenry is also considered moderate.
One common application of inductance is used in traffic lights that can tell when vehicles are waiting at the
intersection. An electrical circuit with an inductor is placed in the road under the place a waiting car will stop over.
The body of the car increases the inductance and the circuit changes sending a signal to the traffic lights to change
colors. Similarly, metal detectors used for airport security employ the same technique. A coil or inductor in the metal
detector frame acts as both a transmitter and a receiver. The pulsed signal in the transmitter coil induces a signal in
the receiver. The self-inductance of the circuit is affected by any metal object in the path. Such detectors can be
adjusted for sensitivity and also can indicate the approximate location of metal found on a person. SeeFigure 23.41.
FIGURE23.41The familiar security gate at an airport can not only detect metals but also indicate their approximate height above the floor.
(credit: shankar s/Flickr)
Energy Stored in an Inductor
We know from Lenz’s law that inductances oppose changes in current. There is an alternative way to look at this
opposition that is based on energy. Energy is stored in a magnetic field. It takes time to build up energy, and it also
takes time to deplete energy; hence, there is an opposition to rapid change. In an inductor, the magnetic field is
directly proportional to current and to the inductance of the device. It can be shown that theenergy stored in an
inductor is given by
23.43
This expression is similar to that for the energy stored in a capacitor.
EXAMPLE 23.8
Calculating the Energy Stored in the Field of a Solenoid
How much energy is stored in the 0.632 mH inductor of the preceding example when a 30.0 A current flows through
it?
PAGE: 1054
1036 23 • Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and Electrical Technologies
Strategy
The energy is given by the equation , and all quantities except are known.
Solution
Substituting the value for found in the previous example and the given current into gives
23.44
Discussion
This amount of energy is certainly enough to cause a spark if the current is suddenly switched off. It cannot be built
up instantaneously unless the power input is infinite.
23.10 RL Circuits
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Calculate the current in an RL circuit after a specified number of characteristic time steps.
• Calculate the characteristic time of an RL circuit.
• Sketch the current in an RL circuit over time.
We know that the current through an inductor cannot be turned on or off instantaneously. The change in current
changes flux, inducing an emf opposing the change (Lenz’s law). How long does the opposition last? Currentwill
flow andcanbe turned off, but how long does it take?Figure 23.42shows a switching circuit that can be used to
examine current through an inductor as a function of time.
FIGURE23.42(a) AnRLcircuit with a switch to turn current on and off. When in position 1, the battery, resistor, and inductor are in series
and a current is established. In position 2, the battery is removed and the current eventually stops because of energy loss in the resistor. (b)
A graph of current growth versus time when the switch is moved to position 1. (c) A graph of current decay when the switch is moved to
position 2.
When the switch is first moved to position 1 (at ), the current is zero and it eventually rises to , where
is the total resistance of the circuit. The opposition of the inductor is greatest at the beginning, because the
amount of change is greatest. The opposition it poses is in the form of an induced emf, which decreases to zero as
the current approaches its final value. The opposing emf is proportional to the amount of change left. This is the
hallmark of an exponential behavior, and it can be shown with calculus that
23.45
is the current in anRLcircuit when switched on (Note the similarity to the exponential behavior of the voltage on a
charging capacitor). The initial current is zero and approaches with acharacteristic time constant for
anRLcircuit, given by
23.46
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1055
23.10 • RL Circuits 1037
where has units of seconds, since . In the first period of time , the current rises from zero to ,
since . The current will go 0.632 of the remainder in the next time . A
well-known property of the exponential is that the final value is never exactly reached, but 0.632 of the remainder to
that value is achieved in every characteristic time . In just a few multiples of the time , the final value is very
nearly achieved, as the graph inFigure 23.42(b) illustrates.
The characteristic time depends on only two factors, the inductance and the resistance . The greater the
inductance , the greater is, which makes sense since a large inductance is very effective in opposing change. The
smaller the resistance , the greater is. Again this makes sense, since a small resistance means a large final
current and a greater change to get there. In both cases—large and small —more energy is stored in the
inductor and more time is required to get it in and out.
When the switch inFigure 23.42(a) is moved to position 2 and cuts the battery out of the circuit, the current drops
because of energy dissipation by the resistor. But this is also not instantaneous, since the inductor opposes the
decrease in current by inducing an emf in the same direction as the battery that drove the current. Furthermore,
there is a certain amount of energy, , stored in the inductor, and it is dissipated at a finite rate. As the
current approaches zero, the rate of decrease slows, since the energy dissipation rate is . Once again the
behavior is exponential, and is found to be
23.47
(SeeFigure 23.42(c).) In the first period of time after the switch is closed, the current falls to 0.368 of its
initial value, since . In each successive time , the current falls to 0.368 of the preceding
value, and in a few multiples of , the current becomes very close to zero, as seen in the graph inFigure 23.42(c).
EXAMPLE 23.9
Calculating Characteristic Time and Current in anRLCircuit
(a) What is the characteristic time constant for a 7.50 mH inductor in series with a resistor? (b) Find the
current 5.00 ms after the switch is moved to position 2 to disconnect the battery, if it is initially 10.0 A.
Strategy for (a)
The time constant for anRLcircuit is defined by .
Solution for (a)
Entering known values into the expression for given in yields
23.48
Discussion for (a)
This is a small but definitely finite time. The coil will be very close to its full current in about ten time constants, or
about 25 ms.
Strategy for (b)
We can find the current by using , or by considering the decline in steps. Since the time is twice the
characteristic time, we consider the process in steps.
Solution for (b)
In the first 2.50 ms, the current declines to 0.368 of its initial value, which is
23.49
After another 2.50 ms, or a total of 5.00 ms, the current declines to 0.368 of the value just found. That is,
PAGE: 1056
1038 23 • Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and Electrical Technologies
23.50
Discussion for (b)
After another 5.00 ms has passed, the current will be 0.183 A (seeExercise 23.69); so, although it does die out, the
current certainly does not go to zero instantaneously.
In summary, when the voltage applied to an inductor is changed, the current also changes,but the change in current
lags the change in voltage in an RL circuit. InReactance, Inductive and Capacitive, we explore how anRLcircuit
behaves when a sinusoidal AC voltage is applied.
23.11 Reactance, Inductive and Capacitive
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Sketch voltage and current versus time in simple inductive, capacitive, and resistive circuits.
• Calculate inductive and capacitive reactance.
• Calculate current and/or voltage in simple inductive, capacitive, and resistive circuits.
Many circuits also contain capacitors and inductors, in addition to resistors and an AC voltage source. We have seen
how capacitors and inductors respond to DC voltage when it is switched on and off. We will now explore how
inductors and capacitors react to sinusoidal AC voltage.
Inductors and Inductive Reactance
Suppose an inductor is connected directly to an AC voltage source, as shown inFigure 23.43. It is reasonable to
assume negligible resistance, since in practice we can make the resistance of an inductor so small that it has a
negligible effect on the circuit. Also shown is a graph of voltage and current as functions of time.
FIGURE23.43(a) An AC voltage source in series with an inductor having negligible resistance. (b) Graph of current and voltage across the
inductor as functions of time.
The graph inFigure 23.43(b) starts with voltage at a maximum. Note that the current starts at zero and rises to its
peakafterthe voltage that drives it, just as was the case when DC voltage was switched on in the preceding section.
When the voltage becomes negative at point a, the current begins to decrease; it becomes zero at point b, where
voltage is its most negative. The current then becomes negative, again following the voltage. The voltage becomes
positive at point c and begins to make the current less negative. At point d, the current goes through zero just as the
voltage reaches its positive peak to start another cycle. This behavior is summarized as follows:
AC Voltage in an Inductor
When a sinusoidal voltage is applied to an inductor, the voltage leads the current by one-fourth of a cycle, or by a
phase angle.
Current lags behind voltage, since inductors oppose change in current. Changing current induces a back emf
. This is considered to be an effective resistance of the inductor to AC. The rms current through
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1057
23.11 • Reactance, Inductive and Capacitive 1039
an inductor is given by a version of Ohm’s law:
23.51
where is the rms voltage across the inductor and is defined to be
23.52
with the frequency of the AC voltage source in hertz (An analysis of the circuit using Kirchhoff’s loop rule and
calculus actually produces this expression). is called theinductive reactance, because the inductor reacts to
impede the current. has units of ohms ( , so that frequency times inductance has units of
), consistent with its role as an effective resistance. It makes sense that is proportional to
, since the greater the induction the greater its resistance to change. It is also reasonable that is proportional
to frequency , since greater frequency means greater change in current. That is, is large for large
frequencies (large ,small ). The greater the change, the greater the opposition of an inductor.
EXAMPLE 23.10
Calculating Inductive Reactance and then Current
(a) Calculate the inductive reactance of a 3.00 mH inductor when 60.0 Hz and 10.0 kHz AC voltages are applied. (b)
What is the rms current at each frequency if the applied rms voltage is 120 V?
Strategy
The inductive reactance is found directly from the expression . Once has been found at each
frequency, Ohm’s law as stated in the Equation can be used to find the current at each frequency.
Solution for (a)
Entering the frequency and inductance into Equation gives
23.53
Similarly, at 10 kHz,
23.54
Solution for (b)
The rms current is now found using the version of Ohm’s law in Equation , given the applied rms voltage
is 120 V. For the first frequency, this yields
23.55
Similarly, at 10 kHz,
23.56
Discussion
The inductor reacts very differently at the two different frequencies. At the higher frequency, its reactance is large
and the current is small, consistent with how an inductor impedes rapid change. Thus high frequencies are impeded
the most. Inductors can be used to filter out high frequencies; for example, a large inductor can be put in series with
a sound reproduction system or in series with your home computer to reduce high-frequency sound output from
your speakers or high-frequency power spikes into your computer.
Note that although the resistance in the circuit considered is negligible, the AC current is not extremely large
because inductive reactance impedes its flow. With AC, there is no time for the current to become extremely large.
PAGE: 1058
1040 23 • Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and Electrical Technologies
Capacitors and Capacitive Reactance
Consider the capacitor connected directly to an AC voltage source as shown inFigure 23.44. The resistance of a
circuit like this can be made so small that it has a negligible effect compared with the capacitor, and so we can
assume negligible resistance. Voltage across the capacitor and current are graphed as functions of time in the figure.
FIGURE23.44(a) An AC voltage source in series with a capacitorChaving negligible resistance. (b) Graph of current and voltage across the
capacitor as functions of time.
The graph inFigure 23.44starts with voltage across the capacitor at a maximum. The current is zero at this point,
because the capacitor is fully charged and halts the flow. Then voltage drops and the current becomes negative as
the capacitor discharges. At point a, the capacitor has fully discharged ( on it) and the voltage across it is zero.
The current remains negative between points a and b, causing the voltage on the capacitor to reverse. This is
complete at point b, where the current is zero and the voltage has its most negative value. The current becomes
positive after point b, neutralizing the charge on the capacitor and bringing the voltage to zero at point c, which
allows the current to reach its maximum. Between points c and d, the current drops to zero as the voltage rises to its
peak, and the process starts to repeat. Throughout the cycle, the voltage follows what the current is doing by one-
fourth of a cycle:
AC Voltage in a Capacitor
When a sinusoidal voltage is applied to a capacitor, the voltage follows the current by one-fourth of a cycle, or by
a phase angle.
The capacitor is affecting the current, having the ability to stop it altogether when fully charged. Since an AC voltage
is applied, there is an rms current, but it is limited by the capacitor. This is considered to be an effective resistance
of the capacitor to AC, and so the rms current in the circuit containing only a capacitor is given by another
version of Ohm’s law to be
23.57
where is the rms voltage and is defined (As with , this expression for results from an analysis of the
circuit using Kirchhoff’s rules and calculus)to be
23.58
where is called thecapacitive reactance, because the capacitor reacts to impede the current. has units of
ohms (verification left as an exercise for the reader). is inversely proportional to the capacitance ; the larger
the capacitor, the greater the charge it can store and the greater the current that can flow. It is also inversely
proportional to the frequency ; the greater the frequency, the less time there is to fully charge the capacitor, and so
it impedes current less.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1059
23.11 • Reactance, Inductive and Capacitive 1041
EXAMPLE 23.11
Calculating Capacitive Reactance and then Current
(a) Calculate the capacitive reactance of a 5.00 µF capacitor when 60.0 Hz and 10.0 kHz AC voltages are applied. (b)
What is the rms current if the applied rms voltage is 120 V?
Strategy
The capacitive reactance is found directly from the expression in . Once has been found at each
frequency, Ohm’s law stated as can be used to find the current at each frequency.
Solution for (a)
Entering the frequency and capacitance into gives
23.59
Similarly, at 10 kHz,
23.60
Solution for (b)
The rms current is now found using the version of Ohm’s law in , given the applied rms voltage is 120 V.
For the first frequency, this yields
23.61
Similarly, at 10 kHz,
23.62
Discussion
The capacitor reacts very differently at the two different frequencies, and in exactly the opposite way an inductor
reacts. At the higher frequency, its reactance is small and the current is large. Capacitors favor change, whereas
inductors oppose change. Capacitors impede low frequencies the most, since low frequency allows them time to
become charged and stop the current. Capacitors can be used to filter out low frequencies. For example, a capacitor
in series with a sound reproduction system rids it of the 60 Hz hum.
Although a capacitor is basically an open circuit, there is an rms current in a circuit with an AC voltage applied to a
capacitor. This is because the voltage is continually reversing, charging and discharging the capacitor. If the
frequency goes to zero (DC), tends to infinity, and the current is zero once the capacitor is charged. At very high
frequencies, the capacitor’s reactance tends to zero—it has a negligible reactance and does not impede the current
(it acts like a simple wire).Capacitors have the opposite effect on AC circuits that inductors have.
Resistors in an AC Circuit
Just as a reminder, considerFigure 23.45, which shows an AC voltage applied to a resistor and a graph of voltage
and current versus time. The voltage and current are exactlyinphasein a resistor. There is no frequency
dependence to the behavior of plain resistance in a circuit:
PAGE: 1060
1042 23 • Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and Electrical Technologies
FIGURE23.45(a) An AC voltage source in series with a resistor. (b) Graph of current and voltage across the resistor as functions of time,
showing them to be exactly in phase.
AC Voltage in a Resistor
When a sinusoidal voltage is applied to a resistor, the voltage is exactly in phase with the current—they have a
phase angle.
23.12 RLC Series AC Circuits
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Calculate the impedance, phase angle, resonant frequency, power, power factor, voltage, and/or current
in a RLC series circuit.
• Draw the circuit diagram for an RLC series circuit.
• Explain the significance of the resonant frequency.
Impedance
When alone in an AC circuit, inductors, capacitors, and resistors all impede current. How do they behave when all
three occur together? Interestingly, their individual resistances in ohms do not simply add. Because inductors and
capacitors behave in opposite ways, they partially to totally cancel each other’s effect.Figure 23.46shows anRLC
series circuit with an AC voltage source, the behavior of which is the subject of this section. The crux of the analysis
of anRLCcircuit is the frequency dependence of and , and the effect they have on the phase of voltage
versus current (established in the preceding section). These give rise to the frequency dependence of the circuit,
with important “resonance” features that are the basis of many applications, such as radio tuners.
FIGURE23.46AnRLCseries circuit with an AC voltage source.
The combined effect of resistance , inductive reactance , and capacitive reactance is defined to be
impedance, an AC analogue to resistance in a DC circuit. Current, voltage, and impedance in anRLCcircuit are
related by an AC version of Ohm’s law:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1061
23.12 • RLC Series AC Circuits 1043
23.63
Here is the peak current, the peak source voltage, and is the impedance of the circuit. The units of
impedance are ohms, and its effect on the circuit is as you might expect: the greater the impedance, the smaller the
current. To get an expression for in terms of , , and , we will now examine how the voltages across the
various components are related to the source voltage. Those voltages are labeled , , and inFigure 23.46.
Conservation of charge requires current to be the same in each part of the circuit at all times, so that we can say the
currents in , , and are equal and in phase. But we know from the preceding section that the voltage across the
inductor leads the current by one-fourth of a cycle, the voltage across the capacitor follows the current by
one-fourth of a cycle, and the voltage across the resistor is exactly in phase with the current.Figure 23.47shows
these relationships in one graph, as well as showing the total voltage around the circuit , where
all four voltages are the instantaneous values. According to Kirchhoff’s loop rule, the total voltage around the circuit
is also the voltage of the source.
You can see fromFigure 23.47that while is in phase with the current, leads by , and follows by .
Thus and are out of phase (crest to trough) and tend to cancel, although not completely unless they
have the same magnitude. Since the peak voltages are not aligned (not in phase), the peak voltage of the source
doesnotequal the sum of the peak voltages across , , and . The actual relationship is
23.64
where , , and are the peak voltages across , , and , respectively. Now, using Ohm’s law and
definitions fromReactance, Inductive and Capacitive, we substitute into the above, as well as
, , and , yielding
23.65
cancels to yield an expression for :
23.66
which is the impedance of anRLCseries AC circuit. For circuits without a resistor, take ; for those without an
inductor, take ; and for those without a capacitor, take .
FIGURE23.47This graph shows the relationships of the voltages in anRLCcircuit to the current. The voltages across the circuit elements
add to equal the voltage of the source, which is seen to be out of phase with the current.
PAGE: 1062
1044 23 • Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and Electrical Technologies
EXAMPLE 23.12
Calculating Impedance and Current
AnRLCseries circuit has a resistor, a 3.00 mH inductor, and a capacitor. (a) Find the circuit’s
impedance at 60.0 Hz and 10.0 kHz, noting that these frequencies and the values for and are the same as in
Example 23.10andExample 23.11. (b) If the voltage source has , what is at each frequency?
Strategy
For each frequency, we use to find the impedance and then Ohm’s law to find current. We
can take advantage of the results of the previous two examples rather than calculate the reactances again.
Solution for (a)
At 60.0 Hz, the values of the reactances were found inExample 23.10to be and inExample 23.11to
be . Entering these and the given for resistance into yields
23.67
Similarly, at 10.0 kHz, and , so that
23.68
Discussion for (a)
In both cases, the result is nearly the same as the largest value, and the impedance is definitely not the sum of the
individual values. It is clear that dominates at high frequency and dominates at low frequency.
Solution for (b)
The current can be found using the AC version of Ohm’s law in Equation :
at 60.0 Hz
Finally, at 10.0 kHz, we find
at 10.0 kHz
Discussion for (a)
The current at 60.0 Hz is the same (to three digits) as found for the capacitor alone inExample 23.11. The capacitor
dominates at low frequency. The current at 10.0 kHz is only slightly different from that found for the inductor alone
inExample 23.10. The inductor dominates at high frequency.
Resonance inRLCSeries AC Circuits
How does anRLCcircuit behave as a function of the frequency of the driving voltage source? Combining Ohm’s law,
, and the expression for impedance from gives
23.69
The reactances vary with frequency, with large at high frequencies and large at low frequencies, as we have
seen in three previous examples. At some intermediate frequency , the reactances will be equal and cancel,
giving —this is a minimum value for impedance, and a maximum value for results. We can get an
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1063
23.12 • RLC Series AC Circuits 1045
expression for by taking
23.70
Substituting the definitions of and ,
23.71
Solving this expression for yields
23.72
where is theresonant frequencyof anRLCseries circuit. This is also thenatural frequencyat which the circuit
would oscillate if not driven by the voltage source. At , the effects of the inductor and capacitor cancel, so that
, and is a maximum.
Resonance in AC circuits is analogous to mechanical resonance, where resonance is defined to be a forced
oscillation—in this case, forced by the voltage source—at the natural frequency of the system. The receiver in a radio
is anRLCcircuit that oscillates best at its . A variable capacitor is often used to adjust to receive a desired
frequency and to reject others.Figure 23.48is a graph of current as a function of frequency, illustrating a resonant
peak in at . The two curves are for two different circuits, which differ only in the amount of resistance in
them. The peak is lower and broader for the higher-resistance circuit. Thus the higher-resistance circuit does not
resonate as strongly and would not be as selective in a radio receiver, for example.
FIGURE23.48A graph of current versus frequency for twoRLCseries circuits differing only in the amount of resistance. Both have a
resonance at , but that for the higher resistance is lower and broader. The driving AC voltage source has a fixed amplitude .
EXAMPLE 23.13
Calculating Resonant Frequency and Current
For the sameRLCseries circuit having a resistor, a 3.00 mH inductor, and a capacitor: (a) Find the
resonant frequency. (b) Calculate at resonance if is 120 V.
Strategy
The resonant frequency is found by using the expression in . The current at that frequency is the same
as if the resistor alone were in the circuit.
Solution for (a)
Entering the given values for and into the expression given for in yields
23.73
PAGE: 1064
1046 23 • Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and Electrical Technologies
Discussion for (a)
We see that the resonant frequency is between 60.0 Hz and 10.0 kHz, the two frequencies chosen in earlier
examples. This was to be expected, since the capacitor dominated at the low frequency and the inductor dominated
at the high frequency. Their effects are the same at this intermediate frequency.
Solution for (b)
The current is given by Ohm’s law. At resonance, the two reactances are equal and cancel, so that the impedance
equals the resistance alone. Thus,
23.74
Discussion for (b)
At resonance, the current is greater than at the higher and lower frequencies considered for the same circuit in the
preceding example.
Power inRLCSeries AC Circuits
If current varies with frequency in anRLCcircuit, then the power delivered to it also varies with frequency. But the
average power is not simply current times voltage, as it is in purely resistive circuits. As was seen inFigure 23.47,
voltage and current are out of phase in anRLCcircuit. There is aphase angle between the source voltage and
the current , which can be found from
23.75
For example, at the resonant frequency or in a purely resistive circuit , so that . This implies that
and that voltage and current are in phase, as expected for resistors. At other frequencies, average power is
less than at resonance. This is both because voltage and current are out of phase and because is lower. The
fact that source voltage and current are out of phase affects the power delivered to the circuit. It can be shown that
theaverage poweris
23.76
Thus is called thepower factor, which can range from 0 to 1. Power factors near 1 are desirable when
designing an efficient motor, for example. At the resonant frequency, .
EXAMPLE 23.14
Calculating the Power Factor and Power
For the sameRLCseries circuit having a resistor, a 3.00 mH inductor, a capacitor, and a voltage
source with a of 120 V: (a) Calculate the power factor and phase angle for . (b) What is the average
power at 50.0 Hz? (c) Find the average power at the circuit’s resonant frequency.
Strategy and Solution for (a)
The power factor at 60.0 Hz is found from
23.77
We know fromExample 23.12, so that
23.78
This small value indicates the voltage and current are significantly out of phase. In fact, the phase angle is
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1065
23.12 • RLC Series AC Circuits 1047
23.79
Discussion for (a)
The phase angle is close to , consistent with the fact that the capacitor dominates the circuit at this low
frequency (a pureRCcircuit has its voltage and current out of phase).
Strategy and Solution for (b)
The average power at 60.0 Hz is
23.80
was found to be 0.226 A inExample 23.12. Entering the known values gives
23.81
Strategy and Solution for (c)
At the resonant frequency, we know , and was found to be 6.00 A inExample 23.13. Thus,
at resonance (1.30 kHz)
Discussion
Both the current and the power factor are greater at resonance, producing significantly greater power than at higher
and lower frequencies.
Power delivered to anRLCseries AC circuit is dissipated by the resistance alone. The inductor and capacitor have
energy input and output but do not dissipate it out of the circuit. Rather they transfer energy back and forth to one
another, with the resistor dissipating exactly what the voltage source puts into the circuit. This assumes no
significant electromagnetic radiation from the inductor and capacitor, such as radio waves. Such radiation can
happen and may even be desired, as we will see in the next chapter on electromagnetic radiation, but it can also be
suppressed as is the case in this chapter. The circuit is analogous to the wheel of a car driven over a corrugated road
as shown inFigure 23.49. The regularly spaced bumps in the road are analogous to the voltage source, driving the
wheel up and down. The shock absorber is analogous to the resistance damping and limiting the amplitude of the
oscillation. Energy within the system goes back and forth between kinetic (analogous to maximum current, and
energy stored in an inductor) and potential energy stored in the car spring (analogous to no current, and energy
stored in the electric field of a capacitor). The amplitude of the wheels’ motion is a maximum if the bumps in the
road are hit at the resonant frequency.
FIGURE23.49The forced but damped motion of the wheel on the car spring is analogous to anRLCseries AC circuit. The shock absorber
damps the motion and dissipates energy, analogous to the resistance in anRLCcircuit. The mass and spring determine the resonant
frequency.
A pureLCcircuit with negligible resistance oscillates at , the same resonant frequency as anRLCcircuit. It can
serve as a frequency standard or clock circuit—for example, in a digital wristwatch. With a very small resistance, only
a very small energy input is necessary to maintain the oscillations. The circuit is analogous to a car with no shock
absorbers. Once it starts oscillating, it continues at its natural frequency for some time.Figure 23.50shows the
PAGE: 1066
1048 23 • Electromagnetic Induction, AC Circuits, and Electrical Technologies
analogy between anLCcircuit and a mass on a spring.
FIGURE23.50AnLCcircuit is analogous to a mass oscillating on a spring with no friction and no driving force. Energy moves back and forth
between the inductor and capacitor, just as it moves from kinetic to potential in the mass-spring system.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Circuit Construction Kit (AC+DC), Virtual Lab
Build circuits with capacitors, inductors, resistors and AC or DC voltage sources, and inspect them using lab
instruments such as voltmeters and ammeters.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/23-12-rlc-series-ac-circuits)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1067
23 • Glossary 1049
Glossary
back emf the emf generated by a running motor, currents
because it consists of a coil turning in a magnetic magnetic flux the amount of magnetic field going
field; it opposes the voltage powering the motor through a particular area, calculated with
capacitive reactance the opposition of a capacitor to where is the magnetic field
a change in current; calculated by strength over an area at an angle with the
perpendicular to the area
characteristic time constant denoted by , of a
mutual inductance how effective a pair of devices
particular seriesRLcircuit is calculated by ,
are at inducing emfs in each other
where is the inductance and is the resistance
peak emf
eddy current a current loop in a conductor caused by
phase angle denoted by , the amount by which the
motional emf
voltage and current are out of phase with each other
electric generator a device for converting mechanical
in a circuit
work into electric energy; it induces an emf by
power factor the amount by which the power
rotating a coil in a magnetic field
delivered in the circuit is less than the theoretical
electromagnetic induction the process of inducing
maximum of the circuit due to voltage and current
an emf (voltage) with a change in magnetic flux
being out of phase; calculated by
emf induced in a generator coil
resonant frequency the frequency at which the
, where is the area of an
impedance in a circuit is at a minimum, and also the
-turn coil rotated at a constant angular velocity in
frequency at which the circuit would oscillate if not
a uniform magnetic field , over a period of time
driven by a voltage source; calculated by
energy stored in an inductor self-explanatory;
calculated by
Faraday’s law of induction the means of calculating self-inductance how effective a device is at inducing
the emf in a coil due to changing magnetic flux, emf in itself
given by shock hazard the term for electrical hazards due to
current passing through a human
henry the unit of inductance;
step-down transformer a transformer that decreases
impedance the AC analogue to resistance in a DC
voltage
circuit; it is the combined effect of resistance,
step-up transformer a transformer that increases
inductive reactance, and capacitive reactance in the
voltage
form
thermal hazard the term for electrical hazards due to
inductance a property of a device describing how
overheating
efficient it is at inducing emf in another device
three-wire system the wiring system used at present
induction (magnetic induction) the creation of emfs
for safety reasons, with live, neutral, and ground
and hence currents by magnetic fields
wires
inductive reactance the opposition of an inductor to
transformer a device that transforms voltages from
a change in current; calculated by
one value to another using induction
inductor a device that exhibits significant self-
transformer equation the equation showing that the
inductance
ratio of the secondary to primary voltages in a
Lenz’s law the minus sign in Faraday’s law, signifying
transformer equals the ratio of the number of loops
that the emf induced in a coil opposes the change in
in their coils;
magnetic flux
magnetic damping the drag produced by eddy
Section Summary
23.1Induced Emf and Magnetic Flux emf—the process is defined to be electromagnetic
induction.
• The crucial quantity in induction is magnetic flux
, defined to be , where is the 23.2Faraday’s Law of Induction: Lenz’s
magnetic field strength over an area at an angle Law
with the perpendicular to the area.
• Faraday’s law of induction states that the
• Units of magnetic flux are .
emfinduced by a change in magnetic flux is
• Any change in magnetic flux induces an
PAGE: 1068
1050 23 • Section Summary
23.8Electrical Safety: Systems and Devices
when flux changes by in a time . • Electrical safety systems and devices are
employed to prevent thermal and shock hazards.
• If emf is induced in a coil, is its number of turns.
• Circuit breakers and fuses interrupt excessive
• The minus sign means that the emf creates a
currents to prevent thermal hazards.
current and magnetic field thatoppose the
• The three-wire system guards against thermal and
change in flux —this opposition is known as
shock hazards, utilizing live/hot, neutral, and
Lenz’s law.
earth/ground wires, and grounding the neutral
23.3Motional Emf wire and case of the appliance.
• A ground fault interrupter (GFI) prevents shock by
• An emf induced by motion relative to a magnetic detecting the loss of current to unintentional
field is called amotional emfand is given by paths.
• An isolation transformer insulates the device being
where is the length of the object moving at powered from the original source, also to prevent
speed relative to the field. shock.
• Many of these devices use induction to perform
23.4Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping
their basic function.
• Current loops induced in moving conductors are
23.9Inductance
called eddy currents.
• They can create significant drag, called magnetic • Inductance is the property of a device that tells
damping. how effectively it induces an emf in another
device.
23.5Electric Generators
• Mutual inductance is the effect of two devices in
• An electric generator rotates a coil in a magnetic inducing emfs in each other.
field, inducing an emfgiven as a function of time by • A change in current in one induces an emf
in the second:
where is the area of an -turn coil rotated at a
constant angular velocity in a uniform magnetic
field . where is defined to be the mutual inductance
• The peak emf of a generator is between the two devices, and the minus sign is
due to Lenz’s law.
• Symmetrically, a change in current
23.6Back Emf
through the second device induces an emf in
• Any rotating coil will have an induced emf—in the first:
motors, this is called back emf, since it opposes
the emf input to the motor.
where is the same mutual inductance as in the
23.7Transformers reverse process.
• Current changes in a device induce an emf in the
• Transformers use induction to transform voltages
device itself.
from one value to another.
• Self-inductance is the effect of the device inducing
• For a transformer, the voltages across the primary
emf in itself.
and secondary coils are related by
• The device is called an inductor, and the emf
induced in it by a change in current through it is
where and are the voltages across primary
and secondary coils having and turns. where is the self-inductance of the inductor, and
• The currents and in the primary and is the rate of change of current through it.
The minus sign indicates that emf opposes the
secondary coils are related by .
change in current, as required by Lenz’s law.
• A step-up transformer increases voltage and
• The unit of self- and mutual inductance is the
decreases current, whereas a step-down
henry (H), where .
transformer decreases voltage and increases
• The self-inductance of an inductor is
current.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1069
23 • Section Summary 1051
proportional to how much flux changes with with the frequency of the AC voltage source in
current. For an -turn inductor, hertz.
• Inductive reactance has units of ohms and is
greatest at high frequencies.
• The self-inductance of a solenoid is • For capacitors, we find that when a sinusoidal
voltage is applied to a capacitor, the voltage
follows the current by one-fourth of a cycle, or by a
where is its number of turns in the solenoid, phase angle.
is its cross-sectional area, is its length, and • Since a capacitor can stop current when fully
is the permeability of charged, it limits current and offers another form
free space. of AC resistance; Ohm’s law for a capacitor is
• The energy stored in an inductor is
where is the rms voltage across the capacitor.
23.10RL Circuits • is defined to be the capacitive reactance,
given by
• When a series connection of a resistor and an
inductor—anRLcircuit—is connected to a voltage
source, the time variation of the current is • has units of ohms and is greatest at low
frequencies.
where is the final current.
23.12RLC Series AC Circuits
• The characteristic time constant is ,
where is the inductance and is the resistance. • The AC analogy to resistance is impedance , the
• In the first time constant , the current rises from combined effect of resistors, inductors, and
zero to , and 0.632 of the remainder in capacitors, defined by the AC version of Ohm’s
every subsequent time interval . law:
• When the inductor is shorted through a resistor,
current decreases as
where is the peak current and is the peak
source voltage.
Here is the initial current.
• Impedance has units of ohms and is given by
• Current falls to in the first time interval ,
and 0.368 of the remainder toward zero in each .
subsequent time . • The resonant frequency , at which , is
23.11Reactance, Inductive and Capacitive
• For inductors in AC circuits, we find that when a • In an AC circuit, there is a phase angle between
sinusoidal voltage is applied to an inductor, the source voltage and the current , which can be
voltage leads the current by one-fourth of a cycle, found from
or by a phase angle.
• The opposition of an inductor to a change in
current is expressed as a type of AC resistance. • for a purely resistive circuit or anRLC
• Ohm’s law for an inductor is circuit at resonance.
• The average power delivered to anRLCcircuit is
affected by the phase angle and is given by
where is the rms voltage across the inductor.
• is defined to be the inductive reactance, given is called the power factor, which ranges
by from 0 to 1.
PAGE: 1070
1052 23 • Conceptual Questions
Conceptual Questions
23.1Induced Emf and Magnetic Flux 8. A powerful induction cannon can be made by
placing a metal cylinder inside a solenoid coil. The
1. How do the multiple-loop coils and iron ring in the
cylinder is forcefully expelled when solenoid
version of Faraday’s apparatus shown inFigure
current is turned on rapidly. Use Faraday’s and
23.3enhance the observation of induced emf?
Lenz’s laws to explain how this works. Why might
2. When a magnet is thrust into a coil as inFigure
the cylinder get live/hot when the cannon is fired?
23.4(a), what is the direction of the force exerted by
9. An induction stove heats a pot with a coil carrying
the coil on the magnet? Draw a diagram showing
an alternating current located beneath the pot (and
the direction of the current induced in the coil and
without a hot surface). Can the stove surface be a
the magnetic field it produces, to justify your
conductor? Why won’t a coil carrying a direct
response. How does the magnitude of the force
current work?
depend on the resistance of the galvanometer?
10. Explain how you could thaw out a frozen water
3. Explain how magnetic flux can be zero when the
pipe by wrapping a coil carrying an alternating
magnetic field is not zero.
current around it. Does it matter whether or not
4. Is an emf induced in the coil inFigure 23.51when it is
the pipe is a conductor? Explain.
stretched? If so, state why and give the direction of the
induced current.
23.4Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping
11. Explain why magnetic damping might not be
effective on an object made of several thin
conducting layers separated by insulation.
12. Explain how electromagnetic induction can be
used to detect metals? This technique is
particularly important in detecting buried
FIGURE23.51A circular coil of wire is stretched in a magnetic
field. landmines for disposal, geophysical prospecting
and at airports.
23.2Faraday’s Law of Induction: Lenz’s
23.5Electric Generators
Law
13. Using RHR-1, show that the emfs in the sides of
5. A person who works with large magnets sometimes
the generator loop inFigure 23.22are in the same
places her head inside a strong field. She reports
sense and thus add.
feeling dizzy as she quickly turns her head. How
14. The source of a generator’s electrical energy
might this be associated with induction?
output is the work done to turn its coils. How is
6. A particle accelerator sends high-velocity charged
the work needed to turn the generator related to
particles down an evacuated pipe. Explain how a
Lenz’s law?
coil of wire wrapped around the pipe could detect
the passage of individual particles. Sketch a graph
23.6Back Emf
of the voltage output of the coil as a single particle
passes through it. 15. Suppose you find that the belt drive connecting a
powerful motor to an air conditioning unit is
23.3Motional Emf broken and the motor is running freely. Should you
be worried that the motor is consuming a great
7. Why must part of the circuit be moving relative to
deal of energy for no useful purpose? Explain why
other parts, to have usable motional emf? Consider,
or why not.
for example, that the rails inFigure 23.10are
stationary relative to the magnetic field, while the
23.7Transformers
rod moves.
16. Explain what causes physical vibrations in
transformers at twice the frequency of the AC
power involved.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1071
23 • Conceptual Questions 1053
23.8Electrical Safety: Systems and Devices 27. Explain why the capacitor inFigure 23.52(a) acts
as a low-frequency filter between the two circuits,
17. Does plastic insulation on live/hot wires prevent
whereas that inFigure 23.52(b) acts as a high-
shock hazards, thermal hazards, or both?
frequency filter.
18. Why are ordinary circuit breakers and fuses
ineffective in preventing shocks?
19. A GFI may trip just because the live/hot and
neutral wires connected to it are significantly
different in length. Explain why.
23.9Inductance
20. How would you place two identical flat coils in
contact so that they had the greatest mutual
inductance? The least?
21. How would you shape a given length of wire to
give it the greatest self-inductance? The least?
22. Verify, as was concluded without proof inExample
23.7, that units of .
23.11Reactance, Inductive and Capacitive
23. Presbycusis is a hearing loss due to age that
progressively affects higher frequencies. A hearing FIGURE23.52Capacitors and inductors. Capacitor with high
aid amplifier is designed to amplify all frequencies frequency and low frequency.
equally. To adjust its output for presbycusis, would
28. If the capacitors inFigure 23.52are replaced by
you put a capacitor in series or parallel with the
inductors, which acts as a low-frequency filter and
hearing aid’s speaker? Explain.
which as a high-frequency filter?
24. Would you use a large inductance or a large
capacitance in series with a system to filter out 23.12RLC Series AC Circuits
low frequencies, such as the 100 Hz hum in a
sound system? Explain. 29. Does the resonant frequency of an AC circuit
25. High-frequency noise in AC power can damage depend on the peak voltage of the AC source?
computers. Does the plug-in unit designed to Explain why or why not.
prevent this damage use a large inductance or a 30. Suppose you have a motor with a power factor
large capacitance (in series with the computer) to significantly less than 1. Explain why it would be
filter out such high frequencies? Explain. better to improve the power factor as a method of
26. Does inductance depend on current, frequency, or improving the motor’s output, rather than to
both? What about inductive reactance? increase the voltage input.
PAGE: 1072
1054 23 • Problems & Exercises
Problems & Exercises
23.1Induced Emf and Magnetic Flux 5. Referring toFigure 23.55, what are the directions of
the currents in coils 1, 2, and 3 (assume that the
1. What is the value of the magnetic flux at coil 2 in
coils are lying in the plane of the circuit): (a) When
Figure 23.53due to coil 1?
the switch is first closed? (b) When the switch has
been closed for a long time? (c) Just after the
switch is opened?
FIGURE23.53(a) The planes of the two coils are
perpendicular. (b) The wire is perpendicular to the plane of
the coil.
2. What is the value of the magnetic flux through the
coil inFigure 23.53(b) due to the wire?
FIGURE23.55
23.2Faraday’s Law of Induction: Lenz’s
6. Repeat the previous problem with the battery
Law
reversed.
3. Referring toFigure 23.54(a), what is the direction of 7. Verify that the units of / are volts. That is,
the current induced in coil 2: (a) If the current in show that .
coil 1 increases? (b) If the current in coil 1 8. Suppose a 50-turn coil lies in the plane of the page
decreases? (c) If the current in coil 1 is constant? in a uniform magnetic field that is directed into the
Explicitly show how you follow the steps in the page. The coil originally has an area of . It
Problem-Solving Strategy for Lenz's Law. is stretched to have no area in 0.100 s. What is the
direction and magnitude of the induced emf if the
uniform magnetic field has a strength of 1.50 T?
9. (a) An MRI technician moves his hand from a region
of very low magnetic field strength into an MRI
scanner’s 2.00 T field with his fingers pointing in
the direction of the field. Find the average emf
induced in his wedding ring, given its diameter is
2.20 cm and assuming it takes 0.250 s to move it
into the field. (b) Discuss whether this current
FIGURE23.54(a) The coils lie in the same plane. (b) The wire
would significantly change the temperature of the
is in the plane of the coil
ring.
4. Referring toFigure 23.54(b), what is the direction of
10. Integrated Concepts
the current induced in the coil: (a) If the current in
Referring to the situation in the previous problem:
the wire increases? (b) If the current in the wire
(a) What current is induced in the ring if its
decreases? (c) If the current in the wire suddenly
resistance is 0.0100 ? (b) What average power is
changes direction? Explicitly show how you follow
dissipated? (c) What magnetic field is induced at
the steps in theProblem-Solving Strategy for Lenz’s
the center of the ring? (d) What is the direction of
Law.
the induced magnetic field relative to the MRI’s
field?
11. An emf is induced by rotating a 1000-turn, 20.0
cm diameter coil in the Earth’s
magnetic field. What average emf is induced, given
the plane of the coil is originally perpendicular to
the Earth’s field and is rotated to be parallel to the
field in 10.0 ms?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1073
23 • Problems & Exercises 1055
12. A 0.250 m radius, 500-turn coil is rotated one- 22. In the August 1992 space shuttle flight, only 250
fourth of a revolution in 4.17 ms, originally having m of the conducting tether considered inExample
its plane perpendicular to a uniform magnetic 23.2could be let out. A 40.0 V motional emf was
field. (This is 60 rev/s.) Find the magnetic field generated in the Earth’s field,
strength needed to induce an average emf of while moving at . What was the
10,000 V. angle between the shuttle’s velocity and the
13. Integrated Concepts Earth’s field, assuming the conductor was
Approximately how does the emf induced in the perpendicular to the field?
loop inFigure 23.54(b) depend on the distance of 23. Integrated Concepts
the center of the loop from the wire? Derive an expression for the current in a system
14. Integrated Concepts like that inFigure 23.10, under the following
(a) A lightning bolt produces a rapidly varying conditions. The resistance between the rails is ,
magnetic field. If the bolt strikes the earth the rails and the moving rod are identical in cross
vertically and acts like a current in a long straight section and have the same resistivity . The
wire, it will induce a voltage in a loop aligned like distance between the rails is l, and the rod moves
that inFigure 23.54(b). What voltage is induced in at constant speed perpendicular to the uniform
a 1.00 m diameter loop 50.0 m from a field . At time zero, the moving rod is next to the
lightning strike, if the current falls to resistance .
zero in ? (b) Discuss circumstances under 24. Integrated Concepts
which such a voltage would produce noticeable The Tethered Satellite inFigure 23.11has a mass
consequences. of 525 kg and is at the end of a 20.0 km long, 2.50
mm diameter cable with the tensile strength of
23.3Motional Emf steel. (a) How much does the cable stretch if a
100 N force is exerted to pull the satellite in?
15. Use Faraday’s law, Lenz’s law, and RHR-1 to show
(Assume the satellite and shuttle are at the same
that the magnetic force on the current in the
altitude above the Earth.) (b) What is the effective
moving rod inFigure 23.10is in the opposite
force constant of the cable? (c) How much energy
direction of its velocity.
is stored in it when stretched by the 100 N force?
16. If a current flows in the Satellite Tether shown in
25. Integrated Concepts
Figure 23.11, use Faraday’s law, Lenz’s law, and
The Tethered Satellite discussed in this module is
RHR-1 to show that there is a magnetic force on
producing 5.00 kV, and a current of 10.0 A flows.
the tether in the direction opposite to its velocity.
(a) What magnetic drag force does this produce if
17. (a) A jet airplane with a 75.0 m wingspan is flying
the system is moving at 7.80 km/s? (b) How much
at 280 m/s. What emf is induced between wing
kinetic energy is removed from the system in 1.00
tips if the vertical component of the Earth’s field is
h, neglecting any change in altitude or velocity
? (b) Is an emf of this magnitude
during that time? (c) What is the change in velocity
likely to have any consequences? Explain.
if the mass of the system is 100,000 kg? (d)
18. (a) A nonferrous screwdriver is being used in a
Discuss the long term consequences (say, a week-
2.00 T magnetic field. What maximum emf can be
long mission) on the space shuttle’s orbit, noting
induced along its 12.0 cm length when it moves at
what effect a decrease in velocity has and
6.00 m/s? (b) Is it likely that this emf will have any
assessing the magnitude of the effect.
consequences or even be noticed?
19. At what speed must the sliding rod inFigure 23.10
23.4Eddy Currents and Magnetic Damping
move to produce an emf of 1.00 V in a 1.50 T field,
given the rod’s length is 30.0 cm? 26. Make a drawing similar toFigure 23.13, but with
20. The 12.0 cm long rod inFigure 23.10moves at the pendulum moving in the opposite direction.
4.00 m/s. What is the strength of the magnetic Then use Faraday’s law, Lenz’s law, and RHR-1 to
field if a 95.0 V emf is induced? show that magnetic force opposes motion.
21. Prove that when , , and are not mutually
perpendicular, motional emf is given by
. If is perpendicular to , then
is the angle between and . If is
perpendicular to , then is the angle between
and .
PAGE: 1074
1056 23 • Problems & Exercises
34. (a) A car generator turns at 400 rpm when the
engine is idling. Its 300-turn, 5.00 by 8.00 cm
rectangular coil rotates in an adjustable magnetic
27. field so that it can produce sufficient voltage even
FIGURE23.56A coil is moved into and out of a region of
at low rpms. What is the field strength needed to
uniform magnetic field.
produce a 24.0 V peak emf? (b) Discuss how this
A coil is moved through a magnetic field as shown
required field strength compares to those
inFigure 23.56. The field is uniform inside the
available in permanent and electromagnets.
rectangle and zero outside. What is the direction
35. Show that if a coil rotates at an angular velocity ,
of the induced current and what is the direction of
the period of its AC output is .
the magnetic force on the coil at each position
36. A 75-turn, 10.0 cm diameter coil rotates at an
shown?
angular velocity of 8.00 rad/s in a 1.25 T field,
starting with the plane of the coil parallel to the
23.5Electric Generators
field. (a) What is the peak emf? (b) At what time is
the peak emf first reached? (c) At what time is the
28. Calculate the peak voltage of a generator that
emf first at its most negative? (d) What is the
rotates its 200-turn, 0.100 m diameter coil at
period of the AC voltage output?
3600 rpm in a 0.800 T field.
37. (a) If the emf of a coil rotating in a magnetic field
29. At what angular velocity in rpm will the peak
is zero at , and increases to its first peak at
voltage of a generator be 480 V, if its 500-turn,
, what is the angular velocity of the
8.00 cm diameter coil rotates in a 0.250 T field?
coil? (b) At what time will its next maximum
30. What is the peak emf generated by rotating a
occur? (c) What is the period of the output? (d)
1000-turn, 20.0 cm diameter coil in the Earth’s
When is the output first one-fourth of its
magnetic field, given the plane of
maximum? (e) When is it next one-fourth of its
the coil is originally perpendicular to the Earth’s
maximum?
field and is rotated to be parallel to the field in
38. Unreasonable Results
10.0 ms?
A 500-turn coil with a area is spun in
31. What is the peak emf generated by a 0.250 m
the Earth’s field, producing a 12.0
radius, 500-turn coil is rotated one-fourth of a
kV maximum emf. (a) At what angular velocity
revolution in 4.17 ms, originally having its plane
must the coil be spun? (b) What is unreasonable
perpendicular to a uniform magnetic field. (This is
about this result? (c) Which assumption or
60 rev/s.)
premise is responsible?
32. (a) A bicycle generator rotates at 1875 rad/s,
producing an 18.0 V peak emf. It has a 1.00 by
23.6Back Emf
3.00 cm rectangular coil in a 0.640 T field. How
many turns are in the coil? (b) Is this number of
39. Suppose a motor connected to a 120 V source
turns of wire practical for a 1.00 by 3.00 cm coil?
draws 10.0 A when it first starts. (a) What is its
33. Integrated Concepts
resistance? (b) What current does it draw at its
This problem refers to the bicycle generator
normal operating speed when it develops a 100 V
considered in the previous problem. It is driven by
back emf?
a 1.60 cm diameter wheel that rolls on the outside
40. A motor operating on 240 V electricity has a 180 V
rim of the bicycle tire. (a) What is the velocity of
back emf at operating speed and draws a 12.0 A
the bicycle if the generator’s angular velocity is
current. (a) What is its resistance? (b) What
1875 rad/s? (b) What is the maximum emf of the
current does it draw when it is first started?
generator when the bicycle moves at 10.0 m/s,
41. What is the back emf of a 120 V motor that draws
noting that it was 18.0 V under the original
8.00 A at its normal speed and 20.0 A when first
conditions? (c) If the sophisticated generator can
starting?
vary its own magnetic field, what field strength will
42. The motor in a toy car operates on 6.00 V,
it need at 5.00 m/s to produce a 9.00 V maximum
developing a 4.50 V back emf at normal speed. If
emf?
it draws 3.00 A at normal speed, what current
does it draw when starting?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1075
23 • Problems & Exercises 1057
43. Integrated Concepts 50. A large power plant generates electricity at 12.0
The motor in a toy car is powered by four batteries kV. Its old transformer once converted the voltage
in series, which produce a total emf of 6.00 V. The to 335 kV. The secondary of this transformer is
motor draws 3.00 A and develops a 4.50 V back being replaced so that its output can be 750 kV for
emf at normal speed. Each battery has a more efficient cross-country transmission on
internal resistance. What is the resistance of the upgraded transmission lines. (a) What is the ratio
motor? of turns in the new secondary compared with the
old secondary? (b) What is the ratio of new current
23.7Transformers output to old output (at 335 kV) for the same
power? (c) If the upgraded transmission lines have
44. A plug-in transformer, like that inFigure 23.25,
the same resistance, what is the ratio of new line
supplies 9.00 V to a video game system. (a) How
power loss to old?
many turns are in its secondary coil, if its input
51. If the power output in the previous problem is
voltage is 120 V and the primary coil has 400
1000 MW and line resistance is , what were
turns? (b) What is its input current when its output
the old and new line losses?
is 1.30 A?
52. Unreasonable Results
45. An American traveler in New Zealand carries a
The 335 kV AC electricity from a power
transformer to convert New Zealand’s standard
transmission line is fed into the primary coil of a
240 V to 120 V so that she can use some small
transformer. The ratio of the number of turns in
appliances on her trip. (a) What is the ratio of turns
the secondary to the number in the primary is
in the primary and secondary coils of her
. (a) What voltage is induced in the
transformer? (b) What is the ratio of input to
secondary? (b) What is unreasonable about this
output current? (c) How could a New Zealander
result? (c) Which assumption or premise is
traveling in the United States use this same
responsible?
transformer to power her 240 V appliances from
53. Construct Your Own Problem
120 V?
Consider a double transformer to be used to
46. A cassette recorder uses a plug-in transformer to
create very large voltages. The device consists of
convert 120 V to 12.0 V, with a maximum current
two stages. The first is a transformer that
output of 200 mA. (a) What is the current input?
produces a much larger output voltage than its
(b) What is the power input? (c) Is this amount of
input. The output of the first transformer is used
power reasonable for a small appliance?
as input to a second transformer that further
47. (a) What is the voltage output of a transformer
increases the voltage. Construct a problem in
used for rechargeable flashlight batteries, if its
which you calculate the output voltage of the final
primary has 500 turns, its secondary 4 turns, and
stage based on the input voltage of the first stage
the input voltage is 120 V? (b) What input current
and the number of turns or loops in both parts of
is required to produce a 4.00 A output? (c) What is
both transformers (four coils in all). Also calculate
the power input?
the maximum output current of the final stage
48. (a) The plug-in transformer for a laptop computer
based on the input current. Discuss the possibility
puts out 7.50 V and can supply a maximum
of power losses in the devices and the effect on
current of 2.00 A. What is the maximum input
the output current and power.
current if the input voltage is 240 V? Assume
100% efficiency. (b) If the actual efficiency is less
than 100%, would the input current need to be
greater or smaller? Explain.
49. A multipurpose transformer has a secondary coil
with several points at which a voltage can be
extracted, giving outputs of 5.60, 12.0, and 480 V.
(a) The input voltage is 240 V to a primary coil of
280 turns. What are the numbers of turns in the
parts of the secondary used to produce the output
voltages? (b) If the maximum input current is 5.00
A, what are the maximum output currents (each
used alone)?
PAGE: 1076
1058 23 • Problems & Exercises
23.8Electrical Safety: Systems and Devices 60. Camera flashes charge a capacitor to high voltage
by switching the current through an inductor on
54. Integrated Concepts
and off rapidly. In what time must the 0.100 A
A short circuit to the grounded metal case of an
current through a 2.00 mH inductor be switched
appliance occurs as shown inFigure 23.57. The
on or off to induce a 500 V emf?
person touching the case is wet and only has a
61. A large research solenoid has a self-inductance of
resistance to earth/ground. (a) What is
25.0 H. (a) What induced emf opposes shutting it
the voltage on the case if 5.00 mA flows through
off when 100 A of current through it is switched
the person? (b) What is the current in the short
off in 80.0 ms? (b) How much energy is stored in
circuit if the resistance of the earth/ground wire is
the inductor at full current? (c) At what rate in
? (c) Will this trigger the 20.0 A circuit
watts must energy be dissipated to switch the
breaker supplying the appliance?
current off in 80.0 ms? (d) In view of the answer to
the last part, is it surprising that shutting it down
this quickly is difficult?
62. (a) Calculate the self-inductance of a 50.0 cm
long, 10.0 cm diameter solenoid having 1000
loops. (b) How much energy is stored in this
inductor when 20.0 A of current flows through it?
(c) How fast can it be turned off if the induced emf
cannot exceed 3.00 V?
63. A precision laboratory resistor is made of a coil of
wire 1.50 cm in diameter and 4.00 cm long, and it
has 500 turns. (a) What is its self-inductance? (b)
What average emf is induced if the 12.0 A current
through it is turned on in 5.00 ms (one-fourth of a
cycle for 50 Hz AC)? (c) What is its inductance if it
is shortened to half its length and counter-wound
(two layers of 250 turns in opposite directions)?
FIGURE23.57A person can be shocked even when the case
of an appliance is grounded. The large short circuit current 64. The heating coils in a hair dryer are 0.800 cm in
produces a voltage on the case of the appliance, since the
diameter, have a combined length of 1.00 m, and a
resistance of the earth/ground wire is not zero.
total of 400 turns. (a) What is their total self-
inductance assuming they act like a single
23.9Inductance
solenoid? (b) How much energy is stored in them
when 6.00 A flows? (c) What average emf opposes
55. Two coils are placed close together in a physics
shutting them off if this is done in 5.00 ms (one-
lab to demonstrate Faraday’s law of induction. A
fourth of a cycle for 50 Hz AC)?
current of 5.00 A in one is switched off in 1.00 ms,
65. When the 20.0 A current through an inductor is
inducing a 9.00 V emf in the other. What is their
turned off in 1.50 ms, an 800 V emf is induced,
mutual inductance?
opposing the change. What is the value of the self-
56. If two coils placed next to one another have a
inductance?
mutual inductance of 5.00 mH, what voltage is
66. How fast can the 150 A current through a 0.250 H
induced in one when the 2.00 A current in the
inductor be shut off if the induced emf cannot
other is switched off in 30.0 ms?
exceed 75.0 V?
57. The 4.00 A current through a 7.50 mH inductor is
67. Integrated Concepts
switched off in 8.33 ms. What is the emf induced
A very large, superconducting solenoid such as
opposing this?
one used in MRI scans, stores 1.00 MJ of energy in
58. A device is turned on and 3.00 A flows through it
its magnetic field when 100 A flows. (a) Find its
0.100 ms later. What is the self-inductance of the
self-inductance. (b) If the coils “go normal,” they
device if an induced 150 V emf opposes this?
gain resistance and start to dissipate thermal
59. Starting with , show that the
energy. What temperature increase is produced if
units of inductance are .
all the stored energy goes into heating the 1000
kg magnet, given its average specific heat is
?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1077
23 • Problems & Exercises 1059
68. Unreasonable Results 77. (a) Use the exact exponential treatment to find
A 25.0 H inductor has 100 A of current turned off how much time is required to bring the current
in 1.00 ms. (a) What voltage is induced to oppose through an 80.0 mH inductor in series with a
this? (b) What is unreasonable about this result? resistor to 99.0% of its final value, starting
(c) Which assumption or premise is responsible? from zero. (b) Compare your answer to the
approximate treatment using integral numbers of
23.10RL Circuits . (c) Discuss how significant the difference is.
78. (a) Using the exact exponential treatment, find the
69. If you want a characteristicRLtime constant of
time required for the current through a 2.00 H
1.00 s, and you have a resistor, what value
inductor in series with a resistor to be
of self-inductance is needed?
reduced to 0.100% of its original value. (b)
70. YourRLcircuit has a characteristic time constant
Compare your answer to the approximate
of 20.0 ns, and a resistance of . (a) What
treatment using integral numbers of . (c) Discuss
is the inductance of the circuit? (b) What
how significant the difference is.
resistance would give you a 1.00 ns time constant,
perhaps needed for quick response in an
23.11Reactance, Inductive and Capacitive
oscilloscope?
71. A large superconducting magnet, used for 79. At what frequency will a 30.0 mH inductor have a
magnetic resonance imaging, has a 50.0 H reactance of ?
inductance. If you want current through it to be 80. What value of inductance should be used if a
adjustable with a 1.00 s characteristic time reactance is needed at a frequency of
constant, what is the minimum resistance of 500 Hz?
system? 81. What capacitance should be used to produce a
72. Verify that after a time of 10.0 ms, the current for reactance at 60.0 Hz?
the situation considered inExample 23.9will be 82. At what frequency will an 80.0 mF capacitor have
0.183 A as stated. a reactance of ?
73. Suppose you have a supply of inductors ranging 83. (a) Find the current through a 0.500 H inductor
from 1.00 nH to 10.0 H, and resistors ranging from connected to a 60.0 Hz, 480 V AC source. (b) What
to . What is the range of would the current be at 100 kHz?
characteristicRLtime constants you can produce 84. (a) What current flows when a 60.0 Hz, 480 V AC
by connecting a single resistor to a single source is connected to a capacitor? (b)
inductor? What would the current be at 25.0 kHz?
74. (a) What is the characteristic time constant of a 85. A 20.0 kHz, 16.0 V source connected to an
25.0 mH inductor that has a resistance of ? inductor produces a 2.00 A current. What is the
(b) If it is connected to a 12.0 V battery, what is inductance?
the current after 12.5 ms? 86. A 20.0 Hz, 16.0 V source produces a 2.00 mA
75. What percentage of the final current flows current when connected to a capacitor. What is
through an inductor in series with a resistor , the capacitance?
three time constants after the circuit is 87. (a) An inductor designed to filter high-frequency
completed? noise from power supplied to a personal computer
76. The 5.00 A current through a 1.50 H inductor is is placed in series with the computer. What
dissipated by a resistor in a circuit like that minimum inductance should it have to produce a
inFigure 23.42with the switch in position 2. (a) reactance for 15.0 kHz noise? (b) What is
What is the initial energy in the inductor? (b) How its reactance at 60.0 Hz?
long will it take the current to decline to 5.00% of 88. The capacitor inFigure 23.52(a) is designed to
its initial value? (c) Calculate the average power filter low-frequency signals, impeding their
dissipated, and compare it with the initial power transmission between circuits. (a) What
dissipated by the resistor. capacitance is needed to produce a
reactance at a frequency of 120 Hz? (b) What
would its reactance be at 1.00 MHz? (c) Discuss
the implications of your answers to (a) and (b).
PAGE: 1078
1060 23 • Problems & Exercises
89. The capacitor inFigure 23.52(b) will filter high- 97. Suppose you have a supply of inductors ranging
frequency signals by shorting them to earth/ from 1.00 nH to 10.0 H, and capacitors ranging
ground. (a) What capacitance is needed to from 1.00 pF to 0.100 F. What is the range of
produce a reactance of for a 5.00 kHz resonant frequencies that can be achieved from
signal? (b) What would its reactance be at 3.00 combinations of a single inductor and a single
Hz? (c) Discuss the implications of your answers to capacitor?
(a) and (b). 98. What capacitance do you need to produce a
90. Unreasonable Results resonant frequency of 1.00 GHz, when using an
In a recording of voltages due to brain activity (an 8.00 nH inductor?
EEG), a 10.0 mV signal with a 0.500 Hz frequency 99. What inductance do you need to produce a
is applied to a capacitor, producing a current of resonant frequency of 60.0 Hz, when using a
100 mA. Resistance is negligible. (a) What is the capacitor?
capacitance? (b) What is unreasonable about this 100. The lowest frequency in the FM radio band is
result? (c) Which assumption or premise is 88.0 MHz. (a) What inductance is needed to
responsible? produce this resonant frequency if it is
91. Construct Your Own Problem connected to a 2.50 pF capacitor? (b) The
Consider the use of an inductor in series with a capacitor is variable, to allow the resonant
computer operating on 60 Hz electricity. Construct frequency to be adjusted to as high as 108 MHz.
a problem in which you calculate the relative What must the capacitance be at this frequency?
reduction in voltage of incoming high frequency 101. AnRLCseries circuit has a resistor, a
noise compared to 60 Hz voltage. Among the inductor, and an capacitor.(a)
things to consider are the acceptable series Find the circuit’s impedance at 120 Hz. (b) Find
reactance of the inductor for 60 Hz power and the the circuit’s impedance at 5.00 kHz. (c) If the
likely frequencies of noise coming through the voltage source has , what is
power lines. at each frequency? (d) What is the resonant
frequency of the circuit? (e) What is at
23.12RLC Series AC Circuits resonance?
102. AnRLCseries circuit has a resistor, a
92. AnRLcircuit consists of a resistor and a
inductor, and a 25.0 nF capacitor. (a)
3.00 mH inductor. (a) Find its impedance at
Find the circuit’s impedance at 500 Hz. (b) Find
60.0 Hz and 10.0 kHz. (b) Compare these values
the circuit’s impedance at 7.50 kHz. (c) If the
of with those found inExample 23.12in which
voltage source has , what is
there was also a capacitor.
at each frequency? (d) What is the resonant
93. AnRCcircuit consists of a resistor and a
frequency of the circuit? (e) What is at
capacitor. (a) Find its impedance at 60.0
resonance?
Hz and 10.0 kHz. (b) Compare these values of
103. AnRLCseries circuit has a resistor, a
with those found inExample 23.12, in which there
inductor, and an capacitor. (a)
was also an inductor.
Find the power factor at . (b) What is
94. AnLCcircuit consists of a inductor and a
the phase angle at 120 Hz? (c) What is the
capacitor. (a) Find its impedance at 60.0
average power at 120 Hz? (d) Find the average
Hz and 10.0 kHz. (b) Compare these values of
power at the circuit’s resonant frequency.
with those found inExample 23.12in which there
104. AnRLCseries circuit has a resistor, a
was also a resistor.
inductor, and a 25.0 nF capacitor. (a)
95. What is the resonant frequency of a 0.500 mH
Find the power factor at . (b) What
inductor connected to a capacitor?
is the phase angle at this frequency? (c) What is
96. To receive AM radio, you want anRLCcircuit that
the average power at this frequency? (d) Find the
can be made to resonate at any frequency
average power at the circuit’s resonant
between 500 and 1650 kHz. This is accomplished
frequency.
with a fixed inductor connected to a
105. AnRLCseries circuit has a resistor and a
variable capacitor. What range of capacitance is
25.0 mH inductor. At 8000 Hz, the phase angle is
needed?
. (a) What is the impedance? (b) Find the
circuit’s capacitance. (c) If is
applied, what is the average power supplied?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1079
23 • Problems & Exercises 1061
106. Referring toExample 23.14, find the average 107. Critical ThinkingA length of 4.000 m of wire is to
power at 10.0 kHz. be used to detect a magnetic field. The wire is
made into a single square loop and rotated at a
rate of 400 cycles per second. (a) If the magnetic
field is 0.02000 T, what is the magnitude of the
average emf that can be generated in the first
quarter cycle, provided the loop is initially
oriented in a plane perpendicular to the
magnetic field? (b) Is there a difference in the
magnitude of the average emf generated if the
wire is made into two square loops and rotated
at the same rate, starting with the same
orientation of the loops as that of the loop in part
a? If so, what is the average emf possible for the
first quarter cycle for two loops being rotated at
400 cycles per second in the magnetic field? (c)
If the wire is made into a figure eight, what is the
average emf for the first quarter cycle that can be
generated by rotating it at 400 cycles per second
in the magnetic field, again starting with the
same orientation of the oops with respect to the
magnetic field? The wire crosses itself in this
arrangement. (d) Does the shape of the loop
matter?
PAGE: 1080
1062 23 • Problems & Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1081
CHAPTER 24
Electromagnetic Waves
FIGURE24.1Human eyes detect these orange “sea goldie” fish swimming over a coral reef in the blue waters of the Gulf of Eilat (Red Sea)
using visible light. (credit: Daviddarom, Wikimedia Commons)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
24.1Maxwell’s Equations: Electromagnetic Waves Predicted and Observed
24.2Production of Electromagnetic Waves
24.3The Electromagnetic Spectrum
24.4Energy in Electromagnetic Waves
INTRODUCTION TO ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES The beauty of a coral reef, the warm radiance of sunshine, the
sting of sunburn, the X-ray revealing a broken bone, even microwave popcorn—all are brought to us by
electromagnetic waves. The list of the various types of electromagnetic waves, ranging from radio transmission
waves to nuclear gamma-ray ( -ray) emissions, is interesting in itself.
Even more intriguing is that all of these widely varied phenomena are different manifestations of the same
thing—electromagnetic waves. (SeeFigure 24.2.) What are electromagnetic waves? How are they created, and how
do they travel? How can we understand and organize their widely varying properties? What is their relationship to
electric and magnetic effects? These and other questions will be explored.
PAGE: 1082
1064 24 • Electromagnetic Waves
Misconception Alert: Sound Waves vs. Radio Waves
Many people confuse sound waves withradio waves, one type of electromagnetic (EM) wave. However, sound
and radio waves are completely different phenomena. Sound creates pressure variations (waves) in matter, such
as air or water, or your eardrum. Conversely, radio waves areelectromagnetic waves, like visible light, infrared,
ultraviolet, X-rays, and gamma rays. EM waves don’t need a medium in which to propagate; they can travel
through a vacuum, such as outer space.
A radio works because sound waves played by the D.J. at the radio station are converted into electromagnetic
waves, then encoded and transmitted in the radio-frequency range. The radio in your car receives the radio
waves, decodes the information, and uses a speaker to change it back into a sound wave, bringing sweet music
to your ears.
Discovering a New Phenomenon
It is worth noting at the outset that the general phenomenon of electromagnetic waves was predicted by theory
before it was realized that light is a form of electromagnetic wave. The prediction was made by James Clerk Maxwell
in the mid-19th century when he formulated a single theory combining all the electric and magnetic effects known
by scientists at that time. “Electromagnetic waves” was the name he gave to the phenomena his theory predicted.
Such a theoretical prediction followed by experimental verification is an indication of the power of science in
general, and physics in particular. The underlying connections and unity of physics allow certain great minds to solve
puzzles without having all the pieces. The prediction of electromagnetic waves is one of the most spectacular
examples of this power. Certain others, such as the prediction of antimatter, will be discussed in later modules.
FIGURE24.2The electromagnetic waves sent and received by this 50-foot radar dish antenna at Kennedy Space Center in Florida are not
visible, but help track expendable launch vehicles with high-definition imagery. The first use of this C-band radar dish was for the launch of
the Atlas V rocket sending the New Horizons probe toward Pluto. (credit: NASA)
24.1 Maxwell’s Equations: Electromagnetic Waves Predicted and Observed
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Restate Maxwell’s equations.
The Scotsman James Clerk Maxwell (1831–1879) is regarded as the greatest theoretical physicist of the 19th
century. (SeeFigure 24.3.) Although he died young, Maxwell not only formulated a complete electromagnetic
theory, represented byMaxwell’s equations, he also developed the kinetic theory of gases and made significant
contributions to the understanding of color vision and the nature of Saturn’s rings.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1083
24.1 • Maxwell’s Equations: Electromagnetic Waves Predicted and Observed 1065
FIGURE24.3James Clerk Maxwell, a 19th-century physicist, developed a theory that explained the relationship between electricity and
magnetism and correctly predicted that visible light is caused by electromagnetic waves. (credit: G. J. Stodart)
Maxwell brought together all the work that had been done by brilliant physicists such as Oersted, Coulomb, Gauss,
and Faraday, and added his own insights to develop the overarching theory of electromagnetism. Maxwell’s
equations are paraphrased here in words because their mathematical statement is beyond the level of this text.
However, the equations illustrate how apparently simple mathematical statements can elegantly unite and express
a multitude of concepts—why mathematics is the language of science.
Maxwell’s Equations
1. Electric field linesoriginate on positive charges and terminate on negative charges. The electric field is
defined as the force per unit charge on a test charge, and the strength of the force is related to the electric
constant , also known as the permittivity of free space. From Maxwell’s first equation we obtain a special
form of Coulomb’s law known as Gauss’s law for electricity.
2. Magnetic field linesare continuous, having no beginning or end. No magnetic monopoles are known to
exist. The strength of the magnetic force is related to the magnetic constant , also known as the
permeability of free space. This second of Maxwell’s equations is known as Gauss’s law for magnetism.
3. A changing magnetic field induces an electromotive force (emf) and, hence, an electric field. The direction
of the emf opposes the change. This third of Maxwell’s equations is Faraday’s law of induction, and includes
Lenz’s law.
4. Magnetic fields are generated by moving charges or by changing electric fields. This fourth of Maxwell’s
equations encompasses Ampere’s law and adds another source of magnetism—changing electric fields.
Maxwell’s equations encompass the major laws of electricity and magnetism. What is not so apparent is the
symmetry that Maxwell introduced in his mathematical framework. Especially important is his addition of the
hypothesis that changing electric fields create magnetic fields. This is exactly analogous (and symmetric) to
Faraday’s law of induction and had been suspected for some time, but fits beautifully into Maxwell’s equations.
Symmetry is apparent in nature in a wide range of situations. In contemporary research, symmetry plays a major
part in the search for sub-atomic particles using massive multinational particle accelerators such as the new Large
Hadron Collider at CERN.
Making Connections: Unification of Forces
Maxwell’s complete and symmetric theory showed that electric and magnetic forces are not separate, but
different manifestations of the same thing—the electromagnetic force. This classical unification of forces is one
motivation for current attempts to unify the four basic forces in nature—the gravitational, electrical, strong, and
weak nuclear forces.
Since changing electric fields create relatively weak magnetic fields, they could not be easily detected at the time of
PAGE: 1084
1066 24 • Electromagnetic Waves
Maxwell’s hypothesis. Maxwell realized, however, that oscillating charges, like those in AC circuits, produce
changing electric fields. He predicted that these changing fields would propagate from the source like waves
generated on a lake by a jumping fish.
The waves predicted by Maxwell would consist of oscillating electric and magnetic fields—defined to be an
electromagnetic wave (EM wave). Electromagnetic waves would be capable of exerting forces on charges great
distances from their source, and they might thus be detectable. Maxwell calculated that electromagnetic waves
would propagate at a speed given by the equation
24.1
When the values for and are entered into the equation for , we find that
24.2
×
which is the speed of light. In fact, Maxwell concluded that light is an electromagnetic wave having such
wavelengths that it can be detected by the eye.
Other wavelengths should exist—it remained to be seen if they did. If so, Maxwell’s theory and remarkable
predictions would be verified, the greatest triumph of physics since Newton. Experimental verification came within a
few years, but not before Maxwell’s death.
Hertz’s Observations
The German physicist Heinrich Hertz (1857–1894) was the first to generate and detect certain types of
electromagnetic waves in the laboratory. Starting in 1887, he performed a series of experiments that not only
confirmed the existence of electromagnetic waves, but also verified that they travel at the speed of light.
Hertz used an AC (resistor-inductor-capacitor) circuit that resonates at a known frequency and
connected it to a loop of wire as shown inFigure 24.4. High voltages induced across the gap in the loop produced
sparks that were visible evidence of the current in the circuit and that helped generate electromagnetic waves.
Across the laboratory, Hertz had another loop attached to another circuit, which could be tuned (as the dial on
a radio) to the same resonant frequency as the first and could, thus, be made to receive electromagnetic waves. This
loop also had a gap across which sparks were generated, giving solid evidence that electromagnetic waves had been
received.
FIGURE24.4The apparatus used by Hertz in 1887 to generate and detect electromagnetic waves. An circuit connected to the first
loop caused sparks across a gap in the wire loop and generated electromagnetic waves. Sparks across a gap in the second loop located
across the laboratory gave evidence that the waves had been received.
Hertz also studied the reflection, refraction, and interference patterns of the electromagnetic waves he generated,
verifying their wave character. He was able to determine wavelength from the interference patterns, and knowing
their frequency, he could calculate the propagation speed using the equation (velocity—or speed—equals
frequency times wavelength). Hertz was thus able to prove that electromagnetic waves travel at the speed of light.
The SI unit for frequency, the hertz ( ), is named in his honor.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1085
24.2 • Production of Electromagnetic Waves 1067
24.2 Production of Electromagnetic Waves
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the electric and magnetic waves as they move out from a source, such as an AC generator.
• Explain the mathematical relationship between the magnetic field strength and the electrical field
strength.
• Calculate the maximum strength of the magnetic field in an electromagnetic wave, given the maximum
electric field strength.
We can get a good understanding ofelectromagnetic waves(EM) by considering how they are produced. Whenever
a current varies, associated electric and magnetic fields vary, moving out from the source like waves. Perhaps the
easiest situation to visualize is a varying current in a long straight wire, produced by an AC generator at its center, as
illustrated inFigure 24.5.
FIGURE24.5This long straight gray wire with an AC generator at its center becomes a broadcast antenna for electromagnetic waves.
Shown here are the charge distributions at four different times. The electric field ( ) propagates away from the antenna at the speed of
light, forming part of an electromagnetic wave.
Theelectric field( ) shown surrounding the wire is produced by the charge distribution on the wire. Both the and
the charge distribution vary as the current changes. The changing field propagates outward at the speed of light.
There is an associatedmagnetic field( ) which propagates outward as well (seeFigure 24.6). The electric and
magnetic fields are closely related and propagate as an electromagnetic wave. This is what happens in broadcast
antennae such as those in radio and TV stations.
Closer examination of the one complete cycle shown inFigure 24.5reveals the periodic nature of the generator-
driven charges oscillating up and down in the antenna and the electric field produced. At time , there is the
maximum separation of charge, with negative charges at the top and positive charges at the bottom, producing the
maximum magnitude of the electric field (or -field) in the upward direction. One-fourth of a cycle later, there is no
charge separation and the field next to the antenna is zero, while the maximum -field has moved away at speed .
As the process continues, the charge separation reverses and the field reaches its maximum downward value,
returns to zero, and rises to its maximum upward value at the end of one complete cycle. The outgoing wave has an
amplitudeproportional to the maximum separation of charge. Itswavelength is proportional to the period of the
oscillation and, hence, is smaller for short periods or high frequencies. (As usual, wavelength andfrequency are
PAGE: 1086
1068 24 • Electromagnetic Waves
inversely proportional.)
Electric and Magnetic Waves: Moving Together
Following Ampere’s law, current in the antenna produces a magnetic field, as shown inFigure 24.6. The relationship
between and is shown at one instant inFigure 24.6(a). As the current varies, the magnetic field varies in
magnitude and direction.
FIGURE24.6(a) The current in the antenna produces the circular magnetic field lines. The current () produces the separation of charge
along the wire, which in turn creates the electric field as shown. (b) The electric and magnetic fields ( and ) near the wire are
perpendicular; they are shown here for one point in space. (c) The magnetic field varies with current and propagates away from the antenna
at the speed of light.
The magnetic field lines also propagate away from the antenna at the speed of light, forming the other part of the
electromagnetic wave, as seen inFigure 24.6(b). The magnetic part of the wave has the same period and
wavelength as the electric part, since they are both produced by the same movement and separation of charges in
the antenna.
The electric and magnetic waves are shown together at one instant in time inFigure 24.7. The electric and magnetic
fields produced by a long straight wire antenna are exactly in phase. Note that they are perpendicular to one another
and to the direction of propagation, making this atransverse wave.
FIGURE24.7A part of the electromagnetic wave sent out from the antenna at one instant in time. The electric and magnetic fields ( and
) are in phase, and they are perpendicular to one another and the direction of propagation. For clarity, the waves are shown only along one
direction, but they propagate out in other directions too.
Electromagnetic waves generally propagate out from a source in all directions, sometimes forming a complex
radiation pattern. A linear antenna like this one will not radiate parallel to its length, for example. The wave is shown
in one direction from the antenna inFigure 24.7to illustrate its basic characteristics.
Instead of the AC generator, the antenna can also be driven by an AC circuit. In fact, charges radiate whenever they
are accelerated. But while a current in a circuit needs a complete path, an antenna has a varying charge distribution
forming astanding wave, driven by the AC. The dimensions of the antenna are critical for determining the frequency
of the radiated electromagnetic waves. This is aresonantphenomenon and when we tune radios or TV, we vary
electrical properties to achieve appropriate resonant conditions in the antenna.
Receiving Electromagnetic Waves
Electromagnetic waves carry energy away from their source, similar to a sound wave carrying energy away from a
standing wave on a guitar string. An antenna for receiving EM signals works in reverse. And like antennas that
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1087
24.2 • Production of Electromagnetic Waves 1069
produce EM waves, receiver antennas are specially designed to resonate at particular frequencies.
An incoming electromagnetic wave accelerates electrons in the antenna, setting up a standing wave. If the radio or
TV is switched on, electrical components pick up and amplify the signal formed by the accelerating electrons. The
signal is then converted to audio and/or video format. Sometimes big receiver dishes are used to focus the signal
onto an antenna.
In fact, charges radiate whenever they are accelerated. When designing circuits, we often assume that energy does
not quickly escape AC circuits, and mostly this is true. A broadcast antenna is specially designed to enhance the rate
of electromagnetic radiation, and shielding is necessary to keep the radiation close to zero. Some familiar
phenomena are based on the production of electromagnetic waves by varying currents. Your microwave oven, for
example, sends electromagnetic waves, called microwaves, from a concealed antenna that has an oscillating
current imposed on it.
Relating -Field and -Field Strengths
There is a relationship between the - and -field strengths in an electromagnetic wave. This can be understood by
again considering the antenna just described. The stronger the -field created by a separation of charge, the greater
the current and, hence, the greater the -field created.
Since current is directly proportional to voltage (Ohm’s law) and voltage is directly proportional to -field strength,
the two should be directly proportional. It can be shown that the magnitudes of the fields do have a constant ratio,
equal to the speed of light. That is,
24.3
is the ratio of -field strength to -field strength in any electromagnetic wave. This is true at all times and at all
locations in space. A simple and elegant result.
EXAMPLE 24.1
Calculating -Field Strength in an Electromagnetic Wave
What is the maximum strength of the -field in an electromagnetic wave that has a maximum -field strength of
?
Strategy
To find the -field strength, we rearrange the above equation to solve for , yielding
24.4
Solution
We are given , and is the speed of light. Entering these into the expression for yields
24.5
Where T stands for Tesla, a measure of magnetic field strength.
Discussion
The -field strength is less than a tenth of the Earth’s admittedly weak magnetic field. This means that a relatively
strong electric field of 1000 V/m is accompanied by a relatively weak magnetic field. Note that as this wave spreads
out, say with distance from an antenna, its field strengths become progressively weaker.
The result of this example is consistent with the statement made in the moduleMaxwell’s Equations:
Electromagnetic Waves Predicted and Observedthat changing electric fields create relatively weak magnetic fields.
PAGE: 1088
1070 24 • Electromagnetic Waves
They can be detected in electromagnetic waves, however, by taking advantage of the phenomenon of resonance, as
Hertz did. A system with the same natural frequency as the electromagnetic wave can be made to oscillate. All radio
and TV receivers use this principle to pick up and then amplify weak electromagnetic waves, while rejecting all
others not at their resonant frequency.
Take-Home Experiment: Antennas
If you own a cell phone or a laptop, use a search engine or the product documentation to identify the type of
antenna it contains. (If you search online, try adding the words “tear down” to the search.) Do the same for a
friend’s phone or your previous model. What are the differences in reception power or other features?
If you have a radio, try tuning a station to the “edge” of its discernible range, to the point where static interferes
with the sound. Touch the antenna with your hand. Does the reception improve? If so, what is likely happening?
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Radio Waves and Electromagnetic Fields
Broadcast radio waves from KPhET. Wiggle the transmitter electron manually or have it oscillate automatically.
Display the field as a curve or vectors. The strip chart shows the electron positions at the transmitter and at the
receiver.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/l/28Radiowaves).
24.3 The Electromagnetic Spectrum
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• List three “rules of thumb” that apply to the different frequencies along the electromagnetic spectrum.
• Explain why the higher the frequency, the shorter the wavelength of an electromagnetic wave.
• Draw a simplified electromagnetic spectrum, indicating the relative positions, frequencies, and spacing of
the different types of radiation bands.
• List and explain the different methods by which electromagnetic waves are produced across the
spectrum.
In this module we examine how electromagnetic waves are classified into categories such as radio, infrared,
ultraviolet, and so on, so that we can understand some of their similarities as well as some of their differences. We
will also find that there are many connections with previously discussed topics, such as wavelength and resonance.
A brief overview of the production and utilization of electromagnetic waves is found inTable 24.1.
Type of EM Life sciences
Production Applications Issues
wave aspect
Communications Requires controls
Radio & TV Accelerating charges MRI
Remote controls for band use
Accelerating charges & Communications
Microwaves Deep heating Cell phone use
thermal agitation Ovens Radar
Thermal agitations & Thermal imaging Absorbed by
Infrared Greenhouse effect
electronic transitions Heating atmosphere
TABLE24.1Electromagnetic Waves
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1089
24.3 • The Electromagnetic Spectrum 1071
Type of EM Life sciences
Production Applications Issues
wave aspect
Thermal agitations & Photosynthesis
Visible light All pervasive
electronic transitions Human vision
Thermal agitations & Sterilization Cancer Vitamin D Ozone depletion
Ultraviolet
electronic transitions control production Cancer causing
Inner electronic transitions Medical diagnosis
X-rays Medical Security Cancer causing
and fast collisions Cancer therapy
Gamma Nuclear Medical diagnosis Cancer causing
Nuclear decay
rays medicineSecurity Cancer therapy Radiation damage
TABLE24.1Electromagnetic Waves
Connections: Waves
There are many types of waves, such as water waves and even earthquakes. Among the many shared attributes
of waves are propagation speed, frequency, and wavelength. These are always related by the expression
. This module concentrates on EM waves, but other modules contain examples of all of these
characteristics for sound waves and submicroscopic particles.
As noted before, an electromagnetic wave has a frequency and a wavelength associated with it and travels at the
speed of light, or . The relationship among these wave characteristics can be described by , where is
the propagation speed of the wave, is the frequency, and is the wavelength. Here , so that for all
electromagnetic waves,
24.6
Thus, for all electromagnetic waves, the greater the frequency, the smaller the wavelength.
Figure 24.8shows how the various types of electromagnetic waves are categorized according to their wavelengths
and frequencies—that is, it shows the electromagnetic spectrum. Many of the characteristics of the various types of
electromagnetic waves are related to their frequencies and wavelengths, as we shall see.
FIGURE24.8The electromagnetic spectrum, showing the major categories of electromagnetic waves. The range of frequencies and
wavelengths is remarkable. The dividing line between some categories is distinct, whereas other categories overlap.
PAGE: 1090
1072 24 • Electromagnetic Waves
Electromagnetic Spectrum: Rules of Thumb
Three rules that apply to electromagnetic waves in general are as follows:
• High-frequency electromagnetic waves are more energetic and are more able to penetrate than low-
frequency waves.
• High-frequency electromagnetic waves can carry more information per unit time than low-frequency waves.
• The shorter the wavelength of any electromagnetic wave probing a material, the smaller the detail it is
possible to resolve.
Note that there are exceptions to these rules of thumb.
Transmission, Reflection, and Absorption
What happens when an electromagnetic wave impinges on a material? If the material is transparent to the particular
frequency, then the wave can largely be transmitted. If the material is opaque to the frequency, then the wave can
be totally reflected. The wave can also be absorbed by the material, indicating that there is some interaction
between the wave and the material, such as the thermal agitation of molecules.
Of course it is possible to have partial transmission, reflection, and absorption. We normally associate these
properties with visible light, but they do apply to all electromagnetic waves. What is not obvious is that something
that is transparent to light may be opaque at other frequencies. For example, ordinary glass is transparent to visible
light but largely opaque to ultraviolet radiation. Human skin is opaque to visible light—we cannot see through
people—but transparent to X-rays.
Radio and TV Waves
The broad category ofradio wavesis defined to contain any electromagnetic wave produced by currents in wires
and circuits. Its name derives from their most common use as a carrier of audio information (i.e., radio). The name is
applied to electromagnetic waves of similar frequencies regardless of source. Radio waves from outer space, for
example, do not come from alien radio stations. They are created by many astronomical phenomena, and their study
has revealed much about nature on the largest scales.
There are many uses for radio waves, and so the category is divided into many subcategories, including microwaves
and those electromagnetic waves used for AM and FM radio, cellular telephones, and TV.
The lowest commonly encountered radio frequencies are produced by high-voltage AC power transmission lines at
frequencies of 50 or 60 Hz. (SeeFigure 24.9.) These extremely long wavelength electromagnetic waves (about 6000
km!) are one means of energy loss in long-distance power transmission.
FIGURE24.9This high-voltage traction power line running to Eutingen Railway Substation in Germany radiates electromagnetic waves with
very long wavelengths. (credit: Zonk43, Wikimedia Commons)
There was a concern regarding potential health hazards associated with exposure to these electromagnetic fields
( -fields). Some people suspect that living near such transmission lines may cause a variety of illnesses, including
cancer. But these power lines produce non-ionizing radiation, which government environmental organizations,
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1091
24.3 • The Electromagnetic Spectrum 1073
medical researchers, and cancer organizations indicate are not risk factors for illness. Recent reports that have
looked at many European and American epidemiological studies have found no increase in risk for cancer due to
exposure to -fields.
Extremely low frequency (ELF)radio waves of about 1 kHz are used to communicate with submerged submarines.
The ability of radio waves to penetrate salt water is related to their wavelength (much like ultrasound penetrating
tissue)—the longer the wavelength, the farther they penetrate. Since salt water is a good conductor, radio waves are
strongly absorbed by it, and very long wavelengths are needed to reach a submarine under the surface. (SeeFigure
24.10.)
FIGURE24.10Very long wavelength radio waves are needed to reach this submarine, requiring extremely low frequency signals (ELF).
Shorter wavelengths do not penetrate to any significant depth.
AM radio waves are used to carry commercial radio signals in the frequency range from 540 to 1600 kHz. The
abbreviation AM stands foramplitude modulation, which is the method for placing information on these waves.
(SeeFigure 24.11.) Acarrier wavehaving the basic frequency of the radio station, say 1530 kHz, is varied or
modulated in amplitude by an audio signal. The resulting wave has a constant frequency, but a varying amplitude.
A radio receiver tuned to have the same resonant frequency as the carrier wave can pick up the signal, while
rejecting the many other frequencies impinging on its antenna. The receiver’s circuitry is designed to respond to
variations in amplitude of the carrier wave to replicate the original audio signal. That audio signal is amplified to
drive a speaker or perhaps to be recorded.
FIGURE24.11Amplitude modulation for AM radio. (a) A carrier wave at the station’s basic frequency. (b) An audio signal at much lower
audible frequencies. (c) The amplitude of the carrier is modulated by the audio signal without changing its basic frequency.
FM Radio Waves
FM radio waves are also used for commercial radio transmission, but in the frequency range of 88 to 108 MHz. FM
stands forfrequency modulation, another method of carrying information. (SeeFigure 24.12.) Here a carrier wave
having the basic frequency of the radio station, perhaps 105.1 MHz, is modulated in frequency by the audio signal,
producing a wave of constant amplitude but varying frequency.
PAGE: 1092
1074 24 • Electromagnetic Waves
FIGURE24.12Frequency modulation for FM radio. (a) A carrier wave at the station’s basic frequency. (b) An audio signal at much lower
audible frequencies. (c) The frequency of the carrier is modulated by the audio signal without changing its amplitude.
Since audible frequencies range up to 20 kHz (or 0.020 MHz) at most, the frequency of the FM radio wave can vary
from the carrier by as much as 0.020 MHz. Thus the carrier frequencies of two different radio stations cannot be
closer than 0.020 MHz. An FM receiver is tuned to resonate at the carrier frequency and has circuitry that responds
to variations in frequency, reproducing the audio information.
FM radio is inherently less subject to noise from stray radio sources than AM radio. The reason is that amplitudes of
waves add. So an AM receiver would interpret noise added onto the amplitude of its carrier wave as part of the
information. An FM receiver can be made to reject amplitudes other than that of the basic carrier wave and only look
for variations in frequency. It is thus easier to reject noise from FM, since noise produces a variation in amplitude.
Televisionis also broadcast on electromagnetic waves. Since the waves must carry a great deal of visual as well as
audio information, each channel requires a larger range of frequencies than simple radio transmission. TV channels
utilize frequencies in the range of 54 to 88 MHz and 174 to 222 MHz. (The entire FM radio band lies between
channels 88 MHz and 174 MHz.) These TV channels are called VHF (forvery high frequency). Other channels called
UHF (forultra high frequency) utilize an even higher frequency range of 470 to 1000 MHz.
The TV video signal is AM, while the TV audio is FM. Note that these frequencies are those of free transmission with
the user utilizing an old-fashioned roof antenna. Satellite dishes and cable transmission of TV occurs at significantly
higher frequencies and is rapidly evolving with the use of the high-definition or HD format.
EXAMPLE 24.2
Calculating Wavelengths of Radio Waves
Calculate the wavelengths of a 1530-kHz AM radio signal, a 105.1-MHz FM radio signal, and a 1.90-GHz cell phone
signal.
Strategy
The relationship between wavelength and frequency is , where is the speed of light (the
speed of light is only very slightly smaller in air than it is in a vacuum). We can rearrange this equation to find the
wavelength for all three frequencies.
Solution
Rearranging gives
24.7
(a) For the AM radio signal, then,
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1093
24.3 • The Electromagnetic Spectrum 1075
24.8
(b) For the FM radio signal,
24.9
(c) And for the cell phone,
24.10
Discussion
These wavelengths are consistent with the spectrum inFigure 24.8. The wavelengths are also related to other
properties of these electromagnetic waves, as we shall see.
The wavelengths found in the preceding example are representative of AM, FM, and cell phones, and account for
some of the differences in how they are broadcast and how well they travel. The most efficient length for a linear
antenna, such as discussed inProduction of Electromagnetic Waves, is , half the wavelength of the
electromagnetic wave. Thus a very large antenna is needed to efficiently broadcast typical AM radio with its carrier
wavelengths on the order of hundreds of meters.
One benefit to these long AM wavelengths is that they can go over and around rather large obstacles (like buildings
and hills), just as ocean waves can go around large rocks. FM and TV are best received when there is a line of sight
between the broadcast antenna and receiver, and they are often sent from very tall structures. FM, TV, and mobile
phone antennas themselves are much smaller than those used for AM, but they are elevated to achieve an
unobstructed line of sight. (SeeFigure 24.13.)
FIGURE24.13(a) A large tower is used to broadcast TV signals. The actual antennas are small structures on top of the tower—they are
placed at great heights to have a clear line of sight over a large broadcast area. (credit: Ozizo, Wikimedia Commons) (b) The NTT Dokomo
mobile phone tower at Tokorozawa City, Japan. (credit: tokoroten, Wikimedia Commons)
Radio Wave Interference
Astronomers and astrophysicists collect signals from outer space using electromagnetic waves. A common problem
for astrophysicists is the “pollution” from electromagnetic radiation pervading our surroundings from
communication systems in general. Even everyday gadgets like our car keyless entry devices and remote starters
and being able to turn TVs on and off using remotes involve radio-wave frequencies. In order to prevent interference
between all these electromagnetic signals, strict regulations are drawn up for different organizations to utilize
different radio frequency bands.
PAGE: 1094
1076 24 • Electromagnetic Waves
One reason why we are sometimes asked to switch off our mobile phones (operating in the range of 1.9 GHz) or put
them into a noncommunicative mode on airplanes and in hospitals is that important communications or medical
equipment often uses similar radio frequencies and their operation can be affected by frequencies used in the
communication devices.
For example, radio waves used in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) have frequencies on the order of 100 MHz,
although this varies significantly depending on the strength of the magnetic field used and the nuclear type being
scanned. MRI is an important medical imaging and research tool, producing highly detailed two- and three-
dimensional images. Radio waves are broadcast, absorbed, and reemitted in a resonance process that is sensitive to
the density of nuclei (usually protons or hydrogen nuclei).
The wavelength of 100-MHz radio waves is 3 m, yet using the sensitivity of the resonant frequency to the magnetic
field strength, details smaller than a millimeter can be imaged. This is a good example of an exception to a rule of
thumb (in this case, the rubric that details much smaller than the probe’s wavelength cannot be detected). The
intensity of the radio waves used in MRI presents little or no hazard to human health.
Microwaves
Microwavesare the highest-frequency electromagnetic waves that can be produced by currents in macroscopic
circuits and devices. Microwave frequencies range from about to the highest practical resonance at
nearly . Since they have high frequencies, their wavelengths are short compared with those of other radio
waves—hence the name “microwave.”
Microwaves can also be produced by atoms and molecules. They are, for example, a component of electromagnetic
radiation generated bythermal agitation. The thermal motion of atoms and molecules in any object at a
temperature above absolute zero causes them to emit and absorb radiation.
Since it is possible to carry more information per unit time on high frequencies, microwaves are quite suitable for
communications. Most satellite-transmitted information is carried on microwaves, as are land-based long-distance
transmissions. A clear line of sight between transmitter and receiver is needed because of the short wavelengths
involved.
Radaris a common application of microwaves that was first developed in World War II. By detecting and timing
microwave echoes, radar systems can determine the distance to objects as diverse as clouds and aircraft. A Doppler
shift in the radar echo can be used to determine the speed of a car or the intensity of a rainstorm. Sophisticated
radar systems are used to map the Earth and other planets, with a resolution limited by wavelength. (SeeFigure
24.14.) The shorter the wavelength of any probe, the smaller the detail it is possible to observe.
FIGURE24.14An image of Sif Mons with lava flows on Venus, based on Magellan synthetic aperture radar data combined with radar
altimetry to produce a three-dimensional map of the surface. The Venusian atmosphere is opaque to visible light, but not to the microwaves
that were used to create this image. (credit: NSSDC, NASA/JPL)
Heating with Microwaves
How does the ubiquitous microwave oven produce microwaves electronically, and why does food absorb them
preferentially? Microwaves at a frequency of 2.45 GHz are produced by accelerating electrons. The microwaves are
then used to induce an alternating electric field in the oven.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1095
24.3 • The Electromagnetic Spectrum 1077
Water and some other constituents of food have a slightly negative charge at one end and a slightly positive charge
at one end (called polar molecules). The range of microwave frequencies is specially selected so that the polar
molecules, in trying to keep orienting themselves with the electric field, absorb these energies and increase their
temperatures—called dielectric heating.
The energy thereby absorbed results in thermal agitation heating food and not the plate, which does not contain
water. Hot spots in the food are related to constructive and destructive interference patterns. Rotating antennas and
food turntables help spread out the hot spots.
Another use of microwaves for heating is within the human body. Microwaves will penetrate more than shorter
wavelengths into tissue and so can accomplish “deep heating” (called microwave diathermy). This is used for
treating muscular pains, spasms, tendonitis, and rheumatoid arthritis.
Making Connections: Take-Home Experiment—Microwave Ovens
1. Look at the door of a microwave oven. Describe the structure of the door. Why is there a metal grid on the
door? How does the size of the holes in the grid compare with the wavelengths of microwaves used in
microwave ovens? What is this wavelength?
2. Place a glass of water (about 250 ml) in the microwave and heat it for 30 seconds. Measure the temperature
gain (the ). Assuming that the power output of the oven is 1000 W, calculate the efficiency of the heat-
transfer process.
3. Remove the rotating turntable or moving plate and place a cup of water in several places along a line
parallel with the opening. Heat for 30 seconds and measure the for each position. Do you see cases of
destructive interference?
Microwaves generated by atoms and molecules far away in time and space can be received and detected by
electronic circuits. Deep space acts like a blackbody with a 2.7 K temperature, radiating most of its energy in the
microwave frequency range. In 1964, Penzias and Wilson detected this radiation and eventually recognized that it
was the radiation of the Big Bang’s cooled remnants.
Infrared Radiation
The microwave and infrared regions of the electromagnetic spectrum overlap (seeFigure 24.8).Infrared radiation
is generally produced by thermal motion and the vibration and rotation of atoms and molecules. Electronic
transitions in atoms and molecules can also produce infrared radiation.
The range of infrared frequencies extends up to the lower limit of visible light, just below red. In fact, infrared means
“below red.” Frequencies at its upper limit are too high to be produced by accelerating electrons in circuits, but
small systems, such as atoms and molecules, can vibrate fast enough to produce these waves.
Water molecules rotate and vibrate particularly well at infrared frequencies, emitting and absorbing them so
efficiently that the emissivity for skin is in the infrared. Night-vision scopes can detect the infrared emitted
by various warm objects, including humans, and convert it to visible light.
We can examine radiant heat transfer from a house by using a camera capable of detecting infrared radiation.
Reconnaissance satellites can detect buildings, vehicles, and even individual humans by their infrared emissions,
whose power radiation is proportional to the fourth power of the absolute temperature. More mundanely, we use
infrared lamps, some of which are called quartz heaters, to preferentially warm us because we absorb infrared
better than our surroundings.
The Sun radiates like a nearly perfect blackbody (that is, it has ), with a 6000 K surface temperature. About
half of the solar energy arriving at the Earth is in the infrared region, with most of the rest in the visible part of the
spectrum, and a relatively small amount in the ultraviolet. On average, 50 percent of the incident solar energy is
absorbed by the Earth.
The relatively constant temperature of the Earth is a result of the energy balance between the incoming solar
radiation and the energy radiated from the Earth. Most of the infrared radiation emitted from the Earth is absorbed
PAGE: 1096
1078 24 • Electromagnetic Waves
by and in the atmosphere and then radiated back to Earth or into outer space. This radiation back to
Earth is known as the greenhouse effect, and it maintains the surface temperature of the Earth about higher
than it would be if there is no absorption. Some scientists think that the increased concentration of and other
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, resulting from increases in fossil fuel burning, has increased global average
temperatures.
Visible Light
Visible lightis the narrow segment of the electromagnetic spectrum to which the normal human eye responds.
Visible light is produced by vibrations and rotations of atoms and molecules, as well as by electronic transitions
within atoms and molecules. The receivers or detectors of light largely utilize electronic transitions. We say the
atoms and molecules are excited when they absorb and relax when they emit through electronic transitions.
Figure 24.15shows this part of the spectrum, together with the colors associated with particular pure wavelengths.
We usually refer to visible light as having wavelengths of between 400 nm and 750 nm. (The retina of the eye
actually responds to the lowest ultraviolet frequencies, but these do not normally reach the retina because they are
absorbed by the cornea and lens of the eye.)
Red light has the lowest frequencies and longest wavelengths, while violet has the highest frequencies and shortest
wavelengths. Blackbody radiation from the Sun peaks in the visible part of the spectrum but is more intense in the
red than in the violet, making the Sun yellowish in appearance.
FIGURE24.15A small part of the electromagnetic spectrum that includes its visible components. The divisions between infrared, visible,
and ultraviolet are not perfectly distinct, nor are those between the seven rainbow colors.
Living things—plants and animals—have evolved to utilize and respond to parts of the electromagnetic spectrum
they are embedded in. Visible light is the most predominant and we enjoy the beauty of nature through visible light.
Plants are more selective. Photosynthesis makes use of parts of the visible spectrum to make sugars.
EXAMPLE 24.3
Integrated Concept Problem: Correcting Vision with Lasers
During laser vision correction, a brief burst of 193-nm ultraviolet light is projected onto the cornea of a patient. It
makes a spot 0.80 mm in diameter and evaporates a layer of cornea thick. Calculate the energy absorbed,
assuming the corneal tissue has the same properties as water; it is initially at . Assume the evaporated tissue
leaves at a temperature of .
Strategy
The energy from the laser light goes toward raising the temperature of the tissue and also toward evaporating it.
Thus we have two amounts of heat to add together. Also, we need to find the mass of corneal tissue involved.
Solution
To figure out the heat required to raise the temperature of the tissue to , we can apply concepts of thermal
energy. We know that
24.11
where Q is the heat required to raise the temperature, is the desired change in temperature, is the mass of
tissue to be heated, and is the specific heat of water equal to 4186 J/kg/K.
Without knowing the mass at this point, we have
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1097
24.3 • The Electromagnetic Spectrum 1079
24.12
The latent heat of vaporization of water is 2256 kJ/kg, so that the energy needed to evaporate mass is
24.13
To find the mass , we use the equation , where is the density of the tissue and is its volume. For this
case,
×
24.14
× ×
×
Therefore, the total energy absorbed by the tissue in the eye is the sum of and :
× × 24.15
Discussion
The lasers used for this eye surgery are excimer lasers, whose light is well absorbed by biological tissue. They
evaporate rather than burn the tissue, and can be used for precision work. Most lasers used for this type of eye
surgery have an average power rating of about one watt. For our example, if we assume that each laser burst from
this pulsed laser lasts for 10 ns, and there are 400 bursts per second, then the average power is
× .
Optics is the study of the behavior of visible light and other forms of electromagnetic waves. Optics falls into two
distinct categories. When electromagnetic radiation, such as visible light, interacts with objects that are large
compared with its wavelength, its motion can be represented by straight lines like rays. Ray optics is the study of
such situations and includes lenses and mirrors.
When electromagnetic radiation interacts with objects about the same size as the wavelength or smaller, its wave
nature becomes apparent. For example, observable detail is limited by the wavelength, and so visible light can never
detect individual atoms, because they are so much smaller than its wavelength. Physical or wave optics is the study
of such situations and includes all wave characteristics.
Take-Home Experiment: Colors That Match
When you light a match you see largely orange light; when you light a gas stove you see blue light. Why are the
colors different? What other colors are present in these?
Ultraviolet Radiation
Ultraviolet means “above violet.” The electromagnetic frequencies ofultraviolet radiation (UV)extend upward from
violet, the highest-frequency visible light. Ultraviolet is also produced by atomic and molecular motions and
electronic transitions. The wavelengths of ultraviolet extend from 400 nm down to about 10 nm at its highest
frequencies, which overlap with the lowest X-ray frequencies. It was recognized as early as 1801 by Johann Ritter
that the solar spectrum had an invisible component beyond the violet range.
Solar UV radiation is broadly subdivided into three regions: UV-A (320–400 nm), UV-B (290–320 nm), and UV-C
(220–290 nm), ranked from long to shorter wavelengths (from smaller to larger energies). Most UV-B and all UV-C is
absorbed by ozone ( ) molecules in the upper atmosphere. Consequently, 99% of the solar UV radiation reaching
the Earth’s surface is UV-A.
One of the first illustrations of UV light’s impact on Earth occurred during the Apollo 16 mission in 1972. The mission
included the first astronomical images taken from the moon, using a compact and resilient Far Ultraviolet Camera/
PAGE: 1098
1080 24 • Electromagnetic Waves
Spectrograph designed for moon use by scientist and inventor George Robert Carruthers. Designed to capture UV
images without the obscuring effects of the Earth’s atmosphere, its most famous image was of the planet itself.
Carruthers, who also trained the astronauts on the device’s use, mentioned afterward that “the most immediately
obvious and spectacular results were really for the Earth observations, because this was the first time that the Earth
had been photographed from a distance in ultraviolet (UV) light, so that you could see the full extent of the hydrogen
atmosphere, the polar auroris and what we call the tropical airglow belt.”
FIGURE24.16An image of Earth captured with the Far UV Camera/Spectrograph on the Moon. The part of the Earth facing the Sun reflects
much UV light and bands of UV emission are also apparent on the side facing away from the Sun. These bands are the result of aurora
caused by charged particles given off by the Sun. They spiral toward the Earth along Earth’s magnetic field lines. George Robert Carruthers
of the Naval Research Laboratory designed the device specifically for transport and usage on the moon. In the image on the right,
Carruthers explains the operating procedure to the Apollo 16 astronauts. (credit, both images: NASA.)
Human Exposure to UV Radiation
It is largely exposure to UV-B that causes skin cancer. It is estimated that as many as 20% of adults will develop
skin cancer over the course of their lifetime. Again, treatment is often successful if caught early. Despite very little
UV-B reaching the Earth’s surface, there are substantial increases in skin-cancer rates in countries such as Australia,
indicating how important it is that UV-B and UV-C continue to be absorbed by the upper atmosphere.
All UV radiation can damage collagen fibers, resulting in an acceleration of the aging process of skin and the
formation of wrinkles. Because there is so little UV-B and UV-C reaching the Earth’s surface, sunburn is caused by
large exposures, and skin cancer from repeated exposure. Some studies indicate a link between overexposure to the
Sun when young and melanoma later in life.
The tanning response is a defense mechanism in which the body produces pigments to absorb future exposures in
inert skin layers above living cells. Basically UV-B radiation excites DNA molecules, distorting the DNA helix, leading
to mutations and the possible formation of cancerous cells.
Repeated exposure to UV-B may also lead to the formation of cataracts in the eyes—a cause of blindness among
people living in the equatorial belt where medical treatment is limited. Cataracts, clouding in the eye’s lens and a
loss of vision, are age related; 60% of those between the ages of 65 and 74 will develop cataracts. However,
treatment is easy and successful, as one replaces the lens of the eye with a plastic lens. Prevention is important. Eye
protection from UV is more effective with plastic sunglasses than those made of glass.
A major acute effect of extreme UV exposure is the suppression of the immune system, both locally and throughout
the body.
Low-intensity ultraviolet is used to sterilize haircutting implements, implying that the energy associated with
ultraviolet is deposited in a manner different from lower-frequency electromagnetic waves. (Actually this is true for
all electromagnetic waves with frequencies greater than visible light.)
Flash photography is generally not allowed of precious artworks and colored prints because the UV radiation from
the flash can cause photo-degradation in the artworks. Often artworks will have an extra-thick layer of glass in front
of them, which is especially designed to absorb UV radiation.
UV Light and the Ozone Layer
If all of the Sun’s ultraviolet radiation reached the Earth’s surface, there would be extremely grave effects on the
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1099
24.3 • The Electromagnetic Spectrum 1081
biosphere from the severe cell damage it causes. However, the layer of ozone ( ) in our upper atmosphere (10 to
50 km above the Earth) protects life by absorbing most of the dangerous UV radiation.
Unfortunately, today we are observing a depletion in ozone concentrations in the upper atmosphere. This depletion
has led to the formation of an “ozone hole” in the upper atmosphere. The hole is more centered over the southern
hemisphere, and changes with the seasons, being largest in the spring. This depletion is attributed to the breakdown
of ozone molecules by refrigerant gases called chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs).
The UV radiation helps dissociate the CFC’s, releasing highly reactive chlorine (Cl) atoms, which catalyze the
destruction of the ozone layer. For example, the reaction of with a photon of light can be written as:
24.16
The Cl atom then catalyzes the breakdown of ozone as follows:
24.17
A single chlorine atom could destroy ozone molecules for up to two years before being transported down to the
surface. The CFCs are relatively stable and will contribute to ozone depletion for years to come. CFCs are found in
refrigerants, air conditioning systems, foams, and aerosols.
International concern over this problem led to the establishment of the “Montreal Protocol” agreement (1987) to
phase out CFC production in most countries. However, developing-country participation is needed if worldwide
production and elimination of CFCs is to be achieved. Probably the largest contributor to CFC emissions today is
China. And while there are indicators that the Protocol has been a success, there is still substantial risk and
variability in the ozone layer. The 2019 Antarctic ozone hole was small and short-lived, continuing the general trend
toward recovery. But the 2020 Antarctic ozone hole was the largest and longest-lasting on record, partially due to
atmospheric conditions. Furthermore, emissions are not the only concern. Susan Solomon and her colleagues at
MIT have uncovered the substantial impact of CFC “banks,” in certain regions, where outdated and deteriorating
equipment (such as air conditioners) or materials can release enough CFCs to be detectable in the atmosphere and
deplete the ozone layer. (SeeFigure 24.17.)
FIGURE24.17This map of ozone concentration over Antarctica in September 2020 shows severe depletion suspected to be caused by
CFCs. In 2020, ozone depletion was significantly worse than in 2019, but better than in the early 2000s. With less ozone, more ultraviolet
radiation from the Sun reaches the surface, causing more damage. (credit: NASA Earth Observatory)
Benefits of UV Light
Besides the adverse effects of ultraviolet radiation, there are also benefits of exposure in nature and uses in
technology. Vitamin D production in the skin (epidermis) results from exposure to UVB radiation, generally from
sunlight. A number of studies indicate lack of vitamin D can result in the development of a range of cancers
(prostate, breast, colon), so a certain amount of UV exposure is helpful. Lack of vitamin D is also linked to
osteoporosis. Exposures (with no sunscreen) of 10 minutes a day to arms, face, and legs might be sufficient to
provide the accepted dietary level. However, in the winter time north of about latitude, most UVB gets blocked
by the atmosphere.
PAGE: 1100
1082 24 • Electromagnetic Waves
UV radiation is used in the treatment of infantile jaundice and in some skin conditions. It is also used in sterilizing
workspaces and tools, and killing germs in a wide range of applications. It is also used as an analytical tool to
identify substances.
When exposed to ultraviolet, some substances, such as minerals, glow in characteristic visible wavelengths, a
process called fluorescence. So-called black lights emit ultraviolet to cause posters and clothing to fluoresce in the
visible. Ultraviolet is also used in special microscopes to detect details smaller than those observable with longer-
wavelength visible-light microscopes.
Things Great and Small: A Submicroscopic View of X-Ray Production
X-rays can be created in a high-voltage discharge. They are emitted in the material struck by electrons in the
discharge current. There are two mechanisms by which the electrons create X-rays.
The first method is illustrated inFigure 24.18. An electron is accelerated in an evacuated tube by a high positive
voltage. The electron strikes a metal plate (e.g., copper) and produces X-rays. Since this is a high-voltage
discharge, the electron gains sufficient energy to ionize the atom.
FIGURE24.18Artist’s conception of an electron ionizing an atom followed by the recapture of an electron and emission of an X-ray. An
energetic electron strikes an atom and knocks an electron out of one of the orbits closest to the nucleus. Later, the atom captures
another electron, and the energy released by its fall into a low orbit generates a high-energy EM wave called an X-ray.
In the case shown, an inner-shell electron (one in an orbit relatively close to and tightly bound to the nucleus) is
ejected. A short time later, another electron is captured and falls into the orbit in a single great plunge. The
energy released by this fall is given to an EM wave known as an X-ray. Since the orbits of the atom are unique to
the type of atom, the energy of the X-ray is characteristic of the atom, hence the name characteristic X-ray.
The second method by which an energetic electron creates an X-ray when it strikes a material is illustrated in
Figure 24.19. The electron interacts with charges in the material as it penetrates. These collisions transfer
kinetic energy from the electron to the electrons and atoms in the material.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1101
24.3 • The Electromagnetic Spectrum 1083
FIGURE24.19Artist’s conception of an electron being slowed by collisions in a material and emitting X-ray radiation. This energetic
electron makes numerous collisions with electrons and atoms in a material it penetrates. An accelerated charge radiates EM waves, a
second method by which X-rays are created.
A loss of kinetic energy implies an acceleration, in this case decreasing the electron’s velocity. Whenever a
charge is accelerated, it radiates EM waves. Given the high energy of the electron, these EM waves can have high
energy. We call them X-rays. Since the process is random, a broad spectrum of X-ray energy is emitted that is
more characteristic of the electron energy than the type of material the electron encounters. Such EM radiation
is called “bremsstrahlung” (German for “braking radiation”).
X-Rays
In the 1850s, scientists (such as Faraday) began experimenting with high-voltage electrical discharges in tubes
filled with rarefied gases. It was later found that these discharges created an invisible, penetrating form of very high
frequency electromagnetic radiation. This radiation was called anX-ray, because its identity and nature were
unknown.
As described inThings Great and Small, there are two methods by which X-rays are created—both are
submicroscopic processes and can be caused by high-voltage discharges. While the low-frequency end of the X-ray
range overlaps with the ultraviolet, X-rays extend to much higher frequencies (and energies).
X-rays have adverse effects on living cells similar to those of ultraviolet radiation, and they have the additional
liability of being more penetrating, affecting more than the surface layers of cells. Cancer and genetic defects can be
induced by exposure to X-rays. Because of their effect on rapidly dividing cells, X-rays can also be used to treat and
even cure cancer.
The widest use of X-rays is for imaging objects that are opaque to visible light, such as the human body or aircraft
parts. In humans, the risk of cell damage is weighed carefully against the benefit of the diagnostic information
obtained. However, questions have risen in recent years as to accidental overexposure of some people during CT
scans—a mistake at least in part due to poor monitoring of radiation dose.
The ability of X-rays to penetrate matter depends on density, and so an X-ray image can reveal very detailed density
information.Figure 24.20shows an example of the simplest type of X-ray image, an X-ray shadow on film. The
amount of information in a simple X-ray image is impressive, but more sophisticated techniques, such as CT scans,
can reveal three-dimensional information with details smaller than a millimeter.
PAGE: 1102
1084 24 • Electromagnetic Waves
FIGURE24.20This shadow X-ray image shows many interesting features, such as artificial heart valves, a pacemaker, and the wires used
to close the sternum. (credit: P. P. Urone)
The use of X-ray technology in medicine is called radiology—an established and relatively cheap tool in comparison
to more sophisticated technologies. Consequently, X-rays are widely available and used extensively in medical
diagnostics. During World War I, mobile X-ray units, advocated by Marie Curie, were used to diagnose soldiers.
Because they can have wavelengths less than 0.01 nm, X-rays can be scattered (a process called X-ray diffraction)
to detect the shape of molecules and the structure of crystals. X-ray diffraction was crucial to Crick, Watson, and
Wilkins in the determination of the shape of the double-helix DNA molecule.
X-rays are also used as a precise tool for trace-metal analysis in X-ray induced fluorescence, in which the energy of
the X-ray emissions are related to the specific types of elements and amounts of materials present.
Gamma Rays
Soon after nuclear radioactivity was first detected in 1896, it was found that at least three distinct types of radiation
were being emitted. The most penetrating nuclear radiation was called agamma ray( ray)(again a name given
because its identity and character were unknown), and it was later found to be an extremely high frequency
electromagnetic wave.
In fact, rays are any electromagnetic radiation emitted by a nucleus. This can be from natural nuclear decay or
induced nuclear processes in nuclear reactors and weapons. The lower end of the frequency range overlaps
the upper end of the X-ray range, but rays can have the highest frequency of any electromagnetic radiation.
Gamma rays have characteristics identical to X-rays of the same frequency—they differ only in source. At higher
frequencies, rays are more penetrating and more damaging to living tissue. They have many of the same uses as X-
rays, including cancer therapy. Gamma radiation from radioactive materials is used in nuclear medicine.
Figure 24.21shows a medical image based on rays. Food spoilage can be greatly inhibited by exposing it to large
doses of radiation, thereby obliterating responsible microorganisms. Damage to food cells through irradiation
occurs as well, and the long-term hazards of consuming radiation-preserved food are unknown and controversial for
some groups. Both X-ray and technologies are also used in scanning luggage at airports.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1103
24.3 • The Electromagnetic Spectrum 1085
FIGURE24.21This is an image of the rays emitted by nuclei in a compound that is concentrated in the bones and eliminated through the
kidneys. Bone cancer is evidenced by nonuniform concentration in similar structures. For example, some ribs are darker than others.
(credit: P. P. Urone)
Detecting Electromagnetic Waves from Space
The entire electromagnetic spectrum is used by researchers for investigating stars, space, and time. Arthur B. C.
Walker was a pioneer in X-ray and ultraviolet observations, and designed specialized telescopes and instruments to
observe the Sun’s atmosphere and corona. His developments significantly advanced our understanding of stars, and
some of his developments are currently in use in space telescopes as well as in microchip manufacturing. As noted
earlier, Penzias and Wilson detected microwaves to identify the background radiation originating from the Big Bang.
Radio telescopes such as the Arecibo Radio Telescope in Puerto Rico and Parkes Observatory in Australia were
designed to detect radio waves.
Infrared telescopes need to have their detectors cooled by liquid nitrogen to be able to gather useful signals. Since
infrared radiation is predominantly from thermal agitation, if the detectors were not cooled, the vibrations of the
molecules in the antenna would be stronger than the signal being collected.
The most famous of these infrared sensitive telescopes is the James Clerk Maxwell Telescope in Hawaii. The earliest
telescopes, developed in the seventeenth century, were optical telescopes, collecting visible light. Telescopes in the
ultraviolet, X-ray, and -ray regions are placed outside the atmosphere on satellites orbiting the Earth.
The Hubble Space Telescope (launched in 1990) gathers ultraviolet radiation as well as visible light. In the X-ray
region, there is the Chandra X-ray Observatory (launched in 1999), and in the -ray region, there is the new Fermi
Gamma-ray Space Telescope (launched in 2008—taking the place of the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory,
1991–2000). The James Webb Space Telescope, launched in late 2021, observes in a lower-frequency portion of
PAGE: 1104
1086 24 • Electromagnetic Waves
the spectrum compared to Hubble. The JWST observes in long-wavelength visible light (red) through infrared,
enabling it to detect objects that are further away, older, and fainter than previous telescopes could detect.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Color Vision
Make a whole rainbow by mixing red, green, and blue light. Change the wavelength of a monochromatic beam or
filter white light. View the light as a solid beam, or see the individual photons.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/24-3-the-electromagnetic-spectrum)
24.4 Energy in Electromagnetic Waves
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain how the energy and amplitude of an electromagnetic wave are related.
• Given its power output and the heating area, calculate the intensity of a microwave oven’s
electromagnetic field, as well as its peak electric and magnetic field strengths
Anyone who has used a microwave oven knows there is energy inelectromagnetic waves. Sometimes this energy is
obvious, such as in the warmth of the summer sun. Other times it is subtle, such as the unfelt energy of gamma rays,
which can destroy living cells.
Electromagnetic waves can bring energy into a system by virtue of theirelectric and magnetic fields. These fields
can exert forces and move charges in the system and, thus, do work on them. If the frequency of the
electromagnetic wave is the same as the natural frequencies of the system (such as microwaves at the resonant
frequency of water molecules), the transfer of energy is much more efficient.
Connections: Waves and Particles
The behavior of electromagnetic radiation clearly exhibits wave characteristics. But we shall find in later
modules that at high frequencies, electromagnetic radiation also exhibits particle characteristics. These particle
characteristics will be used to explain more of the properties of the electromagnetic spectrum and to introduce
the formal study of modern physics.
Another startling discovery of modern physics is that particles, such as electrons and protons, exhibit wave
characteristics. This simultaneous sharing of wave and particle properties for all submicroscopic entities is one
of the great symmetries in nature.
FIGURE24.22Energy carried by a wave is proportional to its amplitude squared. With electromagnetic waves, larger -fields and -fields
exert larger forces and can do more work.
But there is energy in an electromagnetic wave, whether it is absorbed or not. Once created, the fields carry energy
away from a source. If absorbed, the field strengths are diminished and anything left travels on. Clearly, the larger
the strength of the electric and magnetic fields, the more work they can do and the greater the energy the
electromagnetic wave carries.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1105
24.4 • Energy in Electromagnetic Waves 1087
A wave’s energy is proportional to itsamplitudesquared ( or ). This is true for waves on guitar strings, for
water waves, and for sound waves, where amplitude is proportional to pressure. In electromagnetic waves, the
amplitude is themaximum field strengthof the electric and magnetic fields. (SeeFigure 24.22.)
Thus the energy carried and theintensity of an electromagnetic wave is proportional to and . In fact, for a
continuous sinusoidal electromagnetic wave, the average intensity is given by
24.18
where is the speed of light, is the permittivity of free space, and is the maximum electric field strength;
intensity, as always, is power per unit area (here in ).
The average intensity of an electromagnetic wave can also be expressed in terms of the magnetic field strength
by using the relationship , and the fact that , where is the permeability of free space.
Algebraic manipulation produces the relationship
24.19
where is the maximum magnetic field strength.
One more expression for in terms of both electric and magnetic field strengths is useful. Substituting the fact
that , the previous expression becomes
24.20
Whichever of the three preceding equations is most convenient can be used, since they are really just different
versions of the same principle: Energy in a wave is related to amplitude squared. Furthermore, since these
equations are based on the assumption that the electromagnetic waves are sinusoidal, peak intensity is twice the
average; that is, .
EXAMPLE 24.4
Calculate Microwave Intensities and Fields
On its highest power setting, a certain microwave oven projects 1.00 kW of microwaves onto a 30.0 by 40.0 cm area.
(a) What is the intensity in ? (b) Calculate the peak electric field strength in these waves. (c) What is the
peak magnetic field strength ?
Strategy
In part (a), we can find intensity from its definition as power per unit area. Once the intensity is known, we can use
the equations below to find the field strengths asked for in parts (b) and (c).
Solution for (a)
Entering the given power into the definition of intensity, and noting the area is 0.300 by 0.400 m, yields
24.21
Here , so that
24.22
Note that the peak intensity is twice the average:
24.23
PAGE: 1106
1088 24 • Electromagnetic Waves
Solution for (b)
To find , we can rearrange the first equation given above for to give
24.24
Entering known values gives
24.25
Solution for (c)
Perhaps the easiest way to find magnetic field strength, now that the electric field strength is known, is to use the
relationship given by
24.26
Entering known values gives
24.27
Discussion
As before, a relatively strong electric field is accompanied by a relatively weak magnetic field in an electromagnetic
wave, since , and is a large number.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Explore the effect of different types of radiation on various molecules. Choose the type of radiation and the
molecules to see how they interact.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/l/28Moleculeslight)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1107
24 • Glossary 1089
Glossary
amplitude the height, or magnitude, of an that extends from just below the red region of the
electromagnetic wave visible light spectrum up to the microwave region, or
amplitude modulation (AM) a method for placing from to
information on electromagnetic waves by intensity the power of an electric or magnetic field
modulating the amplitude of a carrier wave with an per unit area, for example, Watts per square meter
audio signal, resulting in a wave with constant magnetic field a vector quantity (B); can be used to
frequency but varying amplitude determine the magnetic force on a moving charged
carrier wave an electromagnetic wave that carries a particle
signal by modulation of its amplitude or frequency magnetic field lines a pattern of continuous,
electric field a vector quantity (E); the lines of imaginary lines that emerge from and enter into
electric force per unit charge, moving radially opposite magnetic poles. The density of the lines
outward from a positive charge and in toward a indicates the magnitude of the magnetic field
negative charge magnetic field strength the magnitude of the
electric field lines a pattern of imaginary lines that magnetic field, denotedB-field
extend between an electric source and charged maximum field strength the maximum amplitude an
objects in the surrounding area, with arrows pointed electromagnetic wave can reach, representing the
away from positively charged objects and toward maximum amount of electric force and/or magnetic
negatively charged objects. The more lines in the flux that the wave can exert
pattern, the stronger the electric field in that region Maxwell’s equations a set of four equations that
electric field strength the magnitude of the electric comprise a complete, overarching theory of
field, denotedE-field electromagnetism
electromagnetic spectrum the full range of microwaves electromagnetic waves with
wavelengths or frequencies of electromagnetic wavelengths in the range from 1 mm to 1 m; they
radiation can be produced by currents in macroscopic circuits
electromagnetic waves radiation in the form of and devices
waves of electric and magnetic energy oscillate to fluctuate back and forth in a steady beat
electromotive force (emf) energy produced per unit radar a common application of microwaves. Radar
charge, drawn from a source that produces an can determine the distance to objects as diverse as
electrical current clouds and aircraft, as well as determine the speed
extremely low frequency (ELF) electromagnetic of a car or the intensity of a rainstorm
radiation with wavelengths usually in the range of 0 radio waves electromagnetic waves with
to 300 Hz, but also about 1kHz wavelengths in the range from 1 mm to 100 km;
frequency the number of complete wave cycles (up- they are produced by currents in wires and circuits
down-up) passing a given point within one second and by astronomical phenomena
(cycles/second) resonant a system that displays enhanced oscillation
frequency modulation (FM) a method of placing when subjected to a periodic disturbance of the
information on electromagnetic waves by same frequency as its natural frequency
modulating the frequency of a carrier wave with an RLCcircuit an electric circuit that includes a resistor,
audio signal, producing a wave of constant capacitor and inductor
amplitude but varying frequency speed of light in a vacuum, such as space, the speed
gamma ray ( ray); extremely high frequency of light is a constant 3 x 108m/s
electromagnetic radiation emitted by the nucleus of standing wave a wave that oscillates in place, with
an atom, either from natural nuclear decay or nodes where no motion happens
induced nuclear processes in nuclear reactors and thermal agitation the thermal motion of atoms and
weapons. The lower end of the -ray frequency molecules in any object at a temperature above
range overlaps the upper end of the X-ray range, but absolute zero, which causes them to emit and
rays can have the highest frequency of any absorb radiation
electromagnetic radiation transverse wave a wave, such as an electromagnetic
hertz an SI unit denoting the frequency of an wave, which oscillates perpendicular to the axis
electromagnetic wave, in cycles per second along the line of travel
infrared radiation (IR) a region of the TV video and audio signals broadcast on
electromagnetic spectrum with a frequency range electromagnetic waves
PAGE: 1108
1090 24 • Section Summary
ultra-high frequency (UHF) TV channels in an even 174 to 222 MHz
higher frequency range than VHF, of 470 to 1000 visible light the narrow segment of the
MHz electromagnetic spectrum to which the normal
ultraviolet radiation (UV) electromagnetic radiation human eye responds
in the range extending upward in frequency from wavelength the distance from one peak to the next in
violet light and overlapping with the lowest X-ray a wave
frequencies, with wavelengths from 400 nm down X-ray invisible, penetrating form of very high
to about 10 nm frequency electromagnetic radiation, overlapping
very high frequency (VHF) TV channels utilizing both the ultraviolet range and the -ray range
frequencies in the two ranges of 54 to 88 MHz and
Section Summary
24.1Maxwell’s Equations: Electromagnetic wavelength, and frequency for any wave is given
Waves Predicted and Observed by , so that for electromagnetic waves,
• Electromagnetic waves consist of oscillating
where is the frequency, is the wavelength, and
electric and magnetic fields and propagate at the
is the speed of light.
speed of light . They were predicted by Maxwell,
• The electromagnetic spectrum is separated into
who also showed that
many categories and subcategories, based on the
frequency and wavelength, source, and uses of the
electromagnetic waves.
where is the permeability of free space and • Any electromagnetic wave produced by currents in
is the permittivity of free space. wires is classified as a radio wave, the lowest
frequency electromagnetic waves. Radio waves
• Maxwell’s prediction of electromagnetic waves
are divided into many types, depending on their
resulted from his formulation of a complete and
applications, ranging up to microwaves at their
symmetric theory of electricity and magnetism,
highest frequencies.
known as Maxwell’s equations.
• Infrared radiation lies below visible light in
• These four equations are paraphrased in this text,
frequency and is produced by thermal motion and
rather than presented numerically, and encompass
the vibration and rotation of atoms and molecules.
the major laws of electricity and magnetism. First
Infrared’s lower frequencies overlap with the
is Gauss’s law for electricity, second is Gauss’s law
highest-frequency microwaves.
for magnetism, third is Faraday’s law of induction,
• Visible light is largely produced by electronic
including Lenz’s law, and fourth is Ampere’s law in
transitions in atoms and molecules, and is defined
a symmetric formulation that adds another source
as being detectable by the human eye. Its colors
of magnetism—changing electric fields.
vary with frequency, from red at the lowest to
24.2Production of Electromagnetic Waves violet at the highest.
• Ultraviolet radiation starts with frequencies just
• Electromagnetic waves are created by oscillating
above violet in the visible range and is produced
charges (which radiate whenever accelerated) and
primarily by electronic transitions in atoms and
have the same frequency as the oscillation.
molecules.
• Since the electric and magnetic fields in most
• X-rays are created in high-voltage discharges and
electromagnetic waves are perpendicular to the
by electron bombardment of metal targets. Their
direction in which the wave moves, it is ordinarily a
lowest frequencies overlap the ultraviolet range
transverse wave.
but extend to much higher values, overlapping at
• The strengths of the electric and magnetic parts of
the high end with gamma rays.
the wave are related by
• Gamma rays are nuclear in origin and are defined
to include the highest-frequency electromagnetic
radiation of any type.
which implies that the magnetic field is very
weak relative to the electric field . 24.4Energy in Electromagnetic Waves
24.3The Electromagnetic Spectrum
• The energy carried by any wave is proportional to
its amplitude squared. For electromagnetic waves,
• The relationship among the speed of propagation,
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1109
24 • Conceptual Questions 1091
this means intensity can be expressed as
and in terms of both electric and magnetic fields
where is the average intensity in , and as
is the maximum electric field strength of a
continuous sinusoidal wave.
• This can also be expressed in terms of the • The three expressions for are all equivalent.
maximum magnetic field strength as
Conceptual Questions
24.2Production of Electromagnetic Waves 6. Should the straight wire antenna of a radio be
vertical or horizontal to best receive radio waves
1. The direction of the electric field shown in each part
broadcast by a vertical transmitter antenna? How
ofFigure 24.5is that produced by the charge
should a loop antenna be aligned to best receive
distribution in the wire. Justify the direction shown
the signals? (Note that the direction of the loop that
in each part, using the Coulomb force law and the
produces the best reception can be used to
definition of , where is a positive test
determine the location of the source. It is used for
charge.
that purpose in tracking tagged animals in nature
2. Is the direction of the magnetic field shown in
studies, for example.)
Figure 24.6(a) consistent with the right-hand rule
7. Under what conditions might wires in a DC circuit
for current (RHR-2) in the direction shown in the
emit electromagnetic waves?
figure?
8. Give an example of interference of electromagnetic
3. Why is the direction of the current shown in each
waves.
part ofFigure 24.6opposite to the electric field
9. Figure 24.25shows the interference pattern of two
produced by the wire’s charge separation?
radio antennas broadcasting the same signal.
4. In which situation shown inFigure 24.23will the
Explain how this is analogous to the interference
electromagnetic wave be more successful in inducing a
pattern for sound produced by two speakers. Could
current in the wire? Explain.
this be used to make a directional antenna system
that broadcasts preferentially in certain directions?
Explain.
FIGURE24.23Electromagnetic waves approaching long straight
wires.
5. In which situation shown inFigure 24.24will the
electromagnetic wave be more successful in inducing a
current in the loop? Explain.
FIGURE24.25An overhead view of two radio broadcast
antennas sending the same signal, and the interference
pattern they produce.
10. Can an antenna be any length? Explain your
FIGURE24.24Electromagnetic waves approaching a wire loop.
answer.
PAGE: 1110
1092 24 • Problems & Exercises
24.3The Electromagnetic Spectrum 19. The rate at which information can be transmitted
on an electromagnetic wave is proportional to the
11. If you live in a region that has a particular TV
frequency of the wave. Is this consistent with the
station, you can sometimes pick up some of its
fact that laser telephone transmission at visible
audio portion on your FM radio receiver. Explain
frequencies carries far more conversations per
how this is possible. Does it imply that TV audio is
optical fiber than conventional electronic
broadcast as FM?
transmission in a wire? What is the implication for
12. Explain why people who have the lens of their eye
ELF radio communication with submarines?
removed because of cataracts are able to see low-
20. Give an example of energy carried by an
frequency ultraviolet.
electromagnetic wave.
13. How do fluorescent soap residues make clothing
21. In an MRI scan, a higher magnetic field requires
look “brighter and whiter” in outdoor light? Would
higher frequency radio waves to resonate with the
this be effective in candlelight?
nuclear type whose density and location is being
14. Give an example of resonance in the reception of
imaged. What effect does going to a larger
electromagnetic waves.
magnetic field have on the most efficient antenna
15. Illustrate that the size of details of an object that
to broadcast those radio waves? Does it favor a
can be detected with electromagnetic waves is
smaller or larger antenna?
related to their wavelength, by comparing details
22. Laser vision correction often uses an excimer laser
observable with two different types (for example,
that produces 193-nm electromagnetic radiation.
radar and visible light or infrared and X-rays).
This wavelength is extremely strongly absorbed by
16. Why don’t buildings block radio waves as
the cornea and ablates it in a manner that
completely as they do visible light?
reshapes the cornea to correct vision defects.
17. Make a list of some everyday objects and decide
Explain how the strong absorption helps
whether they are transparent or opaque to each of
concentrate the energy in a thin layer and thus
the types of electromagnetic waves.
give greater accuracy in shaping the cornea. Also
18. Your friend says that more patterns and colors can
explain how this strong absorption limits damage
be seen on the wings of birds if viewed in
to the lens and retina of the eye.
ultraviolet light. Would you agree with your friend?
Explain your answer.
Problems & Exercises
24.1Maxwell’s Equations: Electromagnetic 5. Verify the units obtained for magnetic field strength
Waves Predicted and Observed inExample 24.1(using the equation ) are
in fact teslas (T).
1. Verify that the correct value for the speed of light
is obtained when numerical values for the
24.3The Electromagnetic Spectrum
permeability and permittivity of free space ( and
) are entered into the equation . 6. (a) Two microwave frequencies are authorized for
use in microwave ovens: 900 and 2560 MHz.
2. Show that, when SI units for and are entered,
Calculate the wavelength of each. (b) Which
the units given by the right-hand side of the
frequency would produce smaller hot spots in foods
equation in the problem above are m/s.
due to interference effects?
7. (a) Calculate the range of wavelengths for AM radio
24.2Production of Electromagnetic Waves
given its frequency range is 540 to 1600 kHz. (b) Do
3. What is the maximum electric field strength in an the same for the FM frequency range of 88.0 to 108
electromagnetic wave that has a maximum MHz.
magnetic field strength of (about 10 8. A radio station utilizes frequencies between
times the Earth’s)? commercial AM and FM. What is the frequency of a
4. The maximum magnetic field strength of an 11.12-m-wavelength channel?
electromagnetic field is . Calculate the 9. Find the frequency range of visible light, given that
maximum electric field strength if the wave is it encompasses wavelengths from 380 to 760 nm.
traveling in a medium in which the speed of the 10. Combing your hair leads to excess electrons on
wave is . the comb. How fast would you have to move the
comb up and down to produce red light?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1111
24 • Problems & Exercises 1093
11. Electromagnetic radiation having a 21. (a) The ideal size (most efficient) for a broadcast
wavelength is classified as infrared radiation. antenna with one end on the ground is one-fourth
What is its frequency? the wavelength ( ) of the electromagnetic
12. Approximately what is the smallest detail radiation being sent out. If a new radio station has
observable with a microscope that uses ultraviolet such an antenna that is 50.0 m high, what
light of frequency ? frequency does it broadcast most efficiently? Is
13. A radar used to detect the presence of aircraft this in the AM or FM band? (b) Discuss the analogy
receives a pulse that has reflected off an object of the fundamental resonant mode of an air
× after it was transmitted. What is the column closed at one end to the resonance of
currents on an antenna that is one-fourth their
distance from the radar station to the reflecting
wavelength.
object?
22. (a) What is the wavelength of 100-MHz radio
14. Some radar systems detect the size and shape of
waves used in an MRI unit? (b) If the frequencies
objects such as aircraft and geological terrain.
are swept over a range centered on 100
Approximately what is the smallest observable
MHz, what is the range of wavelengths broadcast?
detail utilizing 500-MHz radar?
23. (a) What is the frequency of the 193-nm
15. Determine the amount of time it takes for X-rays
ultraviolet radiation used in laser eye surgery? (b)
of frequency × to travel (a) 1 mm and
Assuming the accuracy with which this EM
(b) 1 cm. radiation can ablate the cornea is directly
16. If you wish to detect details of the size of atoms proportional to wavelength, how much more
(about × ) with electromagnetic accurate can this UV be than the shortest visible
wavelength of light?
radiation, it must have a wavelength of about this
24. TV-reception antennas for VHF are constructed
size. (a) What is its frequency? (b) What type of
with cross wires supported at their centers, as
electromagnetic radiation might this be?
shown inFigure 24.26. The ideal length for the
17. If the Sun suddenly turned off, we would not know
cross wires is one-half the wavelength to be
it until its light stopped coming. How long would
that be, given that the Sun is × away? received, with the more expensive antennas
having one for each channel. Suppose you
18. Distances in space are often quoted in units of
measure the lengths of the wires for particular
light years, the distance light travels in one year.
channels and find them to be 1.94 and 0.753 m
(a) How many meters is a light year? (b) How many
long, respectively. What are the frequencies for
meters is it to Andromeda, the nearest large
these channels?
galaxy, given that it is × light years away?
(c) The most distant galaxy yet discovered is
× light years away. How far is this in
meters?
19. A certain 50.0-Hz AC power line radiates an
electromagnetic wave having a maximum electric
field strength of 13.0 kV/m. (a) What is the
wavelength of this very low frequency
electromagnetic wave? (b) What is its maximum
magnetic field strength?
20. During normal beating, the heart creates a
maximum 4.00-mV potential across 0.300 m of a
person’s chest, creating a 1.00-Hz
electromagnetic wave. (a) What is the maximum
FIGURE24.26A television reception antenna has cross
electric field strength created? (b) What is the wires of various lengths to most efficiently receive different
wavelengths.
corresponding maximum magnetic field strength
in the electromagnetic wave? (c) What is the
wavelength of the electromagnetic wave?
PAGE: 1112
1094 24 • Problems & Exercises
25. Conversations with astronauts on lunar walks had 24.4Energy in Electromagnetic Waves
an echo that was used to estimate the distance to
30. What is the intensity of an electromagnetic wave
the Moon. The sound spoken by the person on
with a peak electric field strength of 125 V/m?
Earth was transformed into a radio signal sent to
31. Find the intensity of an electromagnetic wave
the Moon, and transformed back into sound on a
having a peak magnetic field strength of
speaker inside the astronaut’s space suit. This
× .
sound was picked up by the microphone in the
space suit (intended for the astronaut’s voice) and 32. Assume the helium-neon lasers commonly used in
sent back to Earth as a radio echo of sorts. If the student physics laboratories have power outputs
round-trip time was 2.60 s, what was the of 0.250 mW. (a) If such a laser beam is projected
approximate distance to the Moon, neglecting any onto a circular spot 1.00 mm in diameter, what is
delays in the electronics? its intensity? (b) Find the peak magnetic field
26. Lunar astronauts placed a reflector on the Moon’s strength. (c) Find the peak electric field strength.
surface, off which a laser beam is periodically 33. An AM radio transmitter broadcasts 50.0 kW of
reflected. The distance to the Moon is calculated power uniformly in all directions. (a) Assuming all
from the round-trip time. (a) To what accuracy in of the radio waves that strike the ground are
meters can the distance to the Moon be completely absorbed, and that there is no
determined, if this time can be measured to 0.100 absorption by the atmosphere or other objects,
ns? (b) What percent accuracy is this, given the what is the intensity 30.0 km away? (Hint: Half the
average distance to the Moon is × ? power will be spread over the area of a
hemisphere.) (b) What is the maximum electric
27. Radar is used to determine distances to various
field strength at this distance?
objects by measuring the round-trip time for an
34. Suppose the maximum safe intensity of
echo from the object. (a) How far away is the
microwaves for human exposure is taken to be
planet Venus if the echo time is 1000 s? (b) What
. (a) If a radar unit leaks 10.0 W of
is the echo time for a car 75.0 m from a Highway
microwaves (other than those sent by its antenna)
Police radar unit? (c) How accurately (in
uniformly in all directions, how far away must you
nanoseconds) must you be able to measure the
be to be exposed to an intensity considered to be
echo time to an airplane 12.0 km away to
safe? Assume that the power spreads uniformly
determine its distance within 10.0 m?
over the area of a sphere with no complications
28. Integrated Concepts
from absorption or reflection. (b) What is the
(a) Calculate the ratio of the highest to lowest
maximum electric field strength at the safe
frequencies of electromagnetic waves the eye can
intensity? (Note that early radar units leaked more
see, given the wavelength range of visible light is
than modern ones do. This caused identifiable
from 380 to 760 nm. (b) Compare this with the
health problems, such as cataracts, for people
ratio of highest to lowest frequencies the ear can
who worked near them.)
hear.
29. Integrated Concepts
(a) Calculate the rate in watts at which heat
transfer through radiation occurs (almost entirely
in the infrared) from of the Earth’s surface
at night. Assume the emissivity is 0.90, the
temperature of the Earth is , and that of outer
space is 2.7 K. (b) Compare the intensity of this
radiation with that coming to the Earth from the
Sun during the day, which averages about
, only half of which is absorbed. (c)
What is the maximum magnetic field strength in
the outgoing radiation, assuming it is a continuous
wave?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1113
24 • Problems & Exercises 1095
35. A 2.50-m-diameter university communications 39. Integrated Concepts
satellite dish receives TV signals that have a An circuit with a 5.00-pF capacitor oscillates
maximum electric field strength (for one channel) in such a manner as to radiate at a wavelength of
of . (SeeFigure 24.27.) (a) What is the 3.30 m. (a) What is the resonant frequency? (b)
intensity of this wave? (b) What is the power What inductance is in series with the capacitor?
received by the antenna? (c) If the orbiting 40. Integrated Concepts
satellite broadcasts uniformly over an area of What capacitance is needed in series with an
× (a large fraction of North America), inductor to form a circuit that radiates a
wavelength of 196 m?
how much power does it radiate?
41. Integrated Concepts
Police radar determines the speed of motor
vehicles using the same Doppler-shift technique
employed for ultrasound in medical diagnostics.
Beats are produced by mixing the double Doppler-
shifted echo with the original frequency. If
× microwaves are used and a beat
frequency of 150 Hz is produced, what is the
speed of the vehicle? (Assume the same Doppler-
shift formulas are valid with the speed of sound
replaced by the speed of light.)
42. Integrated Concepts
Assume the mostly infrared radiation from a heat
lamp acts like a continuous wave with wavelength
. (a) If the lamp’s 200-W output is
FIGURE24.27Satellite dishes receive TV signals sent from focused on a person’s shoulder, over a circular
orbit. Although the signals are quite weak, the receiver can area 25.0 cm in diameter, what is the intensity in
detect them by being tuned to resonate at their frequency.
? (b) What is the peak electric field
36. Lasers can be constructed that produce an strength? (c) Find the peak magnetic field
extremely high intensity electromagnetic wave for strength. (d) How long will it take to increase the
a brief time—called pulsed lasers. They are used temperature of the 4.00-kg shoulder by ,
to ignite nuclear fusion, for example. Such a laser assuming no other heat transfer and given that its
may produce an electromagnetic wave with a specific heat is × ?
maximum electric field strength of
43. Integrated Concepts
× for a time of 1.00 ns. (a) What is
On its highest power setting, a microwave oven
the maximum magnetic field strength in the wave? increases the temperature of 0.400 kg of
(b) What is the intensity of the beam? (c) What spaghetti by in 120 s. (a) What was the
energy does it deliver on a area? rate of power absorption by the spaghetti, given
37. Show that for a continuous sinusoidal that its specific heat is × ? (b)
electromagnetic wave, the peak intensity is twice
Find the average intensity of the microwaves,
the average intensity ( ), using either
given that they are absorbed over a circular area
the fact that , or ,
20.0 cm in diameter. (c) What is the peak electric
where rms means average (actually root mean
field strength of the microwave? (d) What is its
square, a type of average).
peak magnetic field strength?
38. Suppose a source of electromagnetic waves
44. Integrated Concepts
radiates uniformly in all directions in empty space
Electromagnetic radiation from a 5.00-mW laser is
where there are no absorption or interference
concentrated on a area. (a) What is the
effects. (a) Show that the intensity is inversely
intensity in ? (b) Suppose a 2.00-nC static
proportional to , the distance from the source
charge is in the beam. What is the maximum
squared. (b) Show that the magnitudes of the
electric force it experiences? (c) If the static
electric and magnetic fields are inversely
charge moves at 400 m/s, what maximum
proportional to .
magnetic force can it feel?
PAGE: 1114
1096 24 • Problems & Exercises
45. Integrated Concepts 50. Unreasonable Results
A 200-turn flat coil of wire 30.0 cm in diameter An circuit containing a 1.00-pF capacitor
acts as an antenna for FM radio at a frequency of oscillates at such a frequency that it radiates at a
100 MHz. The magnetic field of the incoming 300-nm wavelength. (a) What is the inductance of
electromagnetic wave is perpendicular to the coil the circuit? (b) What is unreasonable about this
and has a maximum strength of × . result? (c) Which assumptions are unreasonable or
inconsistent?
(a)What power is incident on the coil? (b) What
51. Create Your Own Problem
average emf is induced in the coil over one-fourth
Consider electromagnetic fields produced by high
of a cycle? (c) If the radio receiver has an
voltage power lines. Construct a problem in which
inductance of , what capacitance must it
you calculate the intensity of this electromagnetic
have to resonate at 100 MHz?
radiation in based on the measured
46. Integrated Concepts
magnetic field strength of the radiation in a home
If electric and magnetic field strengths vary
near the power lines. Assume these magnetic field
sinusoidally in time, being zero at , then
strengths are known to average less than a .
and . Let
The intensity is small enough that it is difficult to
here. (a) When are the field
imagine mechanisms for biological damage due to
strengths first zero? (b) When do they reach their
it. Discuss how much energy may be radiating from
most negative value? (c) How much time is
a section of power line several hundred meters
needed for them to complete one cycle?
long and compare this to the power likely to be
47. Unreasonable Results
carried by the lines. An idea of how much power
A researcher measures the wavelength of a
this is can be obtained by calculating the
1.20-GHz electromagnetic wave to be 0.500 m.
approximate current responsible for fields at
(a) Calculate the speed at which this wave
distances of tens of meters.
propagates. (b) What is unreasonable about this
52. Create Your Own Problem
result? (c) Which assumptions are unreasonable
Consider the most recent generation of residential
or inconsistent?
satellite dishes that are a little less than half a
48. Unreasonable Results
meter in diameter. Construct a problem in which
The peak magnetic field strength in a residential
you calculate the power received by the dish and
microwave oven is × . (a) What is the
the maximum electric field strength of the
intensity of the microwave? (b) What is microwave signals for a single channel received by
unreasonable about this result? (c) What is wrong the dish. Among the things to be considered are
about the premise? the power broadcast by the satellite and the area
49. Unreasonable Results over which the power is spread, as well as the area
An circuit containing a 2.00-H inductor of the receiving dish.
oscillates at such a frequency that it radiates at a 53. Critical Thinking (a) Find the magnetic field
1.00-m wavelength. (a) What is the capacitance of strength when the electric field strength is 1,250
the circuit? (b) What is unreasonable about this V/m. (b) If E is increased, would B be increased,
result? (c) Which assumptions are unreasonable decreased, or remain the same? (c) By what factor
or inconsistent? would the change in part b be, if any?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1115
CHAPTER 25
Geometric Optics
FIGURE25.1Image seen as a result of reflection of light on a plane smooth surface. (credit: NASA Goddard Photo and Video, via Flickr)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
25.1The Ray Aspect of Light
25.2The Law of Reflection
25.3The Law of Refraction
25.4Total Internal Reflection
25.5Dispersion: The Rainbow and Prisms
25.6Image Formation by Lenses
25.7Image Formation by Mirrors
INTRODUCTION TO GEOMETRIC OPTICS Geometric OpticsLight from this page or screen is formed into an image
by the lens of your eye, much as the lens of the camera that made this photograph. Mirrors, like lenses, can also
form images that in turn are captured by your eye.
Our lives are filled with light. Through vision, the most valued of our senses, light can evoke spiritual emotions, such
as when we view a magnificent sunset or glimpse a rainbow breaking through the clouds. Light can also simply
amuse us in a theater, or warn us to stop at an intersection. It has innumerable uses beyond vision. Light can carry
telephone signals through glass fibers or cook a meal in a solar oven. Life itself could not exist without light’s energy.
From photosynthesis in plants to the sun warming a cold-blooded animal, its supply of energy is vital.
PAGE: 1116
1098 25 • Geometric Optics
FIGURE25.2Double Rainbow over the bay of Pocitos in Montevideo, Uruguay. (credit: Madrax, Wikimedia Commons)
We already know that visible light is the type of electromagnetic waves to which our eyes respond. That knowledge
still leaves many questions regarding the nature of light and vision. What is color, and how do our eyes detect it?
Why do diamonds sparkle? How does light travel? How do lenses and mirrors form images? These are but a few of
the questions that are answered by the study of optics. Optics is the branch of physics that deals with the behavior
of visible light and other electromagnetic waves. In particular, optics is concerned with the generation and
propagation of light and its interaction with matter. What we have already learned about the generation of light in
our study of heat transfer by radiation will be expanded upon in later topics, especially those on atomic physics.
Now, we will concentrate on the propagation of light and its interaction with matter.
It is convenient to divide optics into two major parts based on the size of objects that light encounters. When light
interacts with an object that is several times as large as the light’s wavelength, its observable behavior is like that of
a ray; it does not prominently display its wave characteristics. We call this part of optics “geometric optics.” This
chapter will concentrate on such situations. When light interacts with smaller objects, it has very prominent wave
characteristics, such as constructive and destructive interference.Wave Opticswill concentrate on such situations.
25.1 The Ray Aspect of Light
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• List the ways by which light travels from a source to another location.
There are three ways in which light can travel from a source to another location. (SeeFigure 25.3.) It can come
directly from the source through empty space, such as from the Sun to Earth. Or light can travel through various
media, such as air and glass, to the person. Light can also arrive after being reflected, such as by a mirror. In all of
these cases, light is modeled as traveling in straight lines called rays. Light may change direction when it encounters
objects (such as a mirror) or in passing from one material to another (such as in passing from air to glass), but it then
continues in a straight line or as a ray. The wordraycomes from mathematics and here means a straight line that
originates at some point. It is acceptable to visualize light rays as laser rays (or even science fiction depictions of ray
guns).
Ray
The word “ray” comes from mathematics and here means a straight line that originates at some point.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1117
25.2 • The Law of Reflection 1099
FIGURE25.3Three methods for light to travel from a source to another location. (a) Light reaches the upper atmosphere of Earth traveling
through empty space directly from the source. (b) Light can reach a person in one of two ways. It can travel through media like air and glass.
It can also reflect from an object like a mirror. In the situations shown here, light interacts with objects large enough that it travels in
straight lines, like a ray.
Experiments, as well as our own experiences, show that when light interacts with objects several times as large as
its wavelength, it travels in straight lines and acts like a ray. Its wave characteristics are not pronounced in such
situations. Since the wavelength of light is less than a micron (a thousandth of a millimeter), it acts like a ray in the
many common situations in which it encounters objects larger than a micron. For example, when light encounters
anything we can observe with unaided eyes, such as a mirror, it acts like a ray, with only subtle wave characteristics.
We will concentrate on the ray characteristics in this chapter.
Since light moves in straight lines, changing directions when it interacts with materials, it is described by geometry
and simple trigonometry. This part of optics, where the ray aspect of light dominates, is therefore calledgeometric
optics. There are two laws that govern how light changes direction when it interacts with matter. These are the law
of reflection, for situations in which light bounces off matter, and the law of refraction, for situations in which light
passes through matter.
Geometric Optics
The part of optics dealing with the ray aspect of light is called geometric optics.
25.2 The Law of Reflection
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain reflection of light from polished and rough surfaces.
Whenever we look into a mirror, or squint at sunlight glinting from a lake, we are seeing a reflection. When you look
at this page, too, you are seeing light reflected from it. Large telescopes use reflection to form an image of stars and
other astronomical objects.
The law of reflection is illustrated inFigure 25.4, which also shows how the angles are measured relative to the
perpendicular to the surface at the point where the light ray strikes. We expect to see reflections from smooth
surfaces, butFigure 25.5illustrates how a rough surface reflects light. Since the light strikes different parts of the
surface at different angles, it is reflected in many different directions, or diffused. Diffused light is what allows us to
see a sheet of paper from any angle, as illustrated inFigure 25.6. Many objects, such as people, clothing, leaves, and
walls, have rough surfaces and can be seen from all sides. A mirror, on the other hand, has a smooth surface
(compared with the wavelength of light) and reflects light at specific angles, as illustrated inFigure 25.7. When the
moon reflects from a lake, as shown inFigure 25.8, a combination of these effects takes place.
PAGE: 1118
1100 25 • Geometric Optics
FIGURE25.4The law of reflection states that the angle of reflection equals the angle of incidence— . The angles are measured
relative to the perpendicular to the surface at the point where the ray strikes the surface.
FIGURE25.5Light is diffused when it reflects from a rough surface. Here many parallel rays are incident, but they are reflected at many
different angles since the surface is rough.
FIGURE25.6When a sheet of paper is illuminated with many parallel incident rays, it can be seen at many different angles, because its
surface is rough and diffuses the light.
FIGURE25.7A mirror illuminated by many parallel rays reflects them in only one direction, since its surface is very smooth. Only the
observer at a particular angle will see the reflected light.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1119
25.2 • The Law of Reflection 1101
FIGURE25.8Moonlight is spread out when it is reflected by the lake, since the surface is shiny but uneven. (credit: Diego Torres Silvestre,
Flickr)
The law of reflection is very simple: The angle of reflection equals the angle of incidence.
The Law of Reflection
The angle of reflection equals the angle of incidence.
When we see ourselves in a mirror, it appears that our image is actually behind the mirror. This is illustrated inFigure
25.9. We see the light coming from a direction determined by the law of reflection. The angles are such that our
image is exactly the same distance behind the mirror as we stand away from the mirror. If the mirror is on the wall of
a room, the images in it are all behind the mirror, which can make the room seem bigger. Although these mirror
images make objects appear to be where they cannot be (like behind a solid wall), the images are not figments of
our imagination. Mirror images can be photographed and videotaped by instruments and look just as they do with
our eyes (optical instruments themselves). The precise manner in which images are formed by mirrors and lenses
will be treated in later sections of this chapter.
FIGURE25.9Our image in a mirror is behind the mirror. The two rays shown are those that strike the mirror at just the correct angles to be
reflected into the eyes of the person. The image appears to be in the direction the rays are coming from when they enter the eyes.
Take-Home Experiment: Law of Reflection
Take a piece of paper and shine a flashlight at an angle at the paper, as shown inFigure 25.6. Now shine the
flashlight at a mirror at an angle. Do your observations confirm the predictions inFigure 25.6andFigure 25.7?
Shine the flashlight on various surfaces and determine whether the reflected light is diffuse or not. You can
choose a shiny metallic lid of a pot or your skin. Using the mirror and flashlight, can you confirm the law of
reflection? You will need to draw lines on a piece of paper showing the incident and reflected rays. (This part
PAGE: 1120
1102 25 • Geometric Optics
works even better if you use a laser pencil.)
25.3 The Law of Refraction
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Determine the index of refraction, given the speed of light in a medium.
It is easy to notice some odd things when looking into a fish tank. For example, you may see the same fish appearing
to be in two different places. (SeeFigure 25.10.) This is because light coming from the fish to us changes direction
when it leaves the tank, and in this case, it can travel two different paths to get to our eyes. The changing of a light
ray’s direction (loosely called bending) when it passes through variations in matter is calledrefraction. Refraction is
responsible for a tremendous range of optical phenomena, from the action of lenses to voice transmission through
optical fibers.
Refraction
The changing of a light ray’s direction (loosely called bending) when it passes through variations in matter is
called refraction.
Speed of Light
The speed of light not only affects refraction, it is one of the central concepts of Einstein’s theory of relativity.
As the accuracy of the measurements of the speed of light were improved, was found not to depend on the
velocity of the source or the observer. However, the speed of light does vary in a precise manner with the
material it traverses. These facts have far-reaching implications, as we will see inSpecial Relativity. It makes
connections between space and time and alters our expectations that all observers measure the same time for
the same event, for example. The speed of light is so important that its value in a vacuum is one of the most
fundamental constants in nature as well as being one of the four fundamental SI units.
FIGURE25.10Looking at the fish tank as shown, we can see the same fish in two different locations, because light changes directions
when it passes from water to air. In this case, the light can reach the observer by two different paths, and so the fish seems to be in two
different places. This bending of light is called refraction and is responsible for many optical phenomena.
Why does light change direction when passing from one material (medium) to another? It is because light changes
speed when going from one material to another. So before we study the law of refraction, it is useful to discuss the
speed of light and how it varies in different media.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1121
25.3 • The Law of Refraction 1103
The Speed of Light
Early attempts to measure the speed of light, such as those made by Galileo, determined that light moved extremely
fast, perhaps instantaneously. The first real evidence that light traveled at a finite speed came from the Danish
astronomer Ole Roemer in the late 17th century. Roemer had noted that the average orbital period of one of
Jupiter’s moons, as measured from Earth, varied depending on whether Earth was moving toward or away from
Jupiter. He correctly concluded that the apparent change in period was due to the change in distance between Earth
and Jupiter and the time it took light to travel this distance. From his 1676 data, a value of the speed of light was
calculated to be (only 25% different from today’s accepted value). In more recent times, physicists
have measured the speed of light in numerous ways and with increasing accuracy. One particularly direct method,
used in 1887 by the American physicist Albert Michelson (1852–1931), is illustrated inFigure 25.11. Light reflected
from a rotating set of mirrors was reflected from a stationary mirror 35 km away and returned to the rotating
mirrors. The time for the light to travel can be determined by how fast the mirrors must rotate for the light to be
returned to the observer’s eye.
FIGURE25.11A schematic of early apparatus used by Michelson and others to determine the speed of light. As the mirrors rotate, the
reflected ray is only briefly directed at the stationary mirror. The returning ray will be reflected into the observer's eye only if the next mirror
has rotated into the correct position just as the ray returns. By measuring the correct rotation rate, the time for the round trip can be
measured and the speed of light calculated. Michelson’s calculated value of the speed of light was only 0.04% different from the value used
today.
The speed of light is now known to great precision. In fact, the speed of light in a vacuum is so important that it is
accepted as one of the basic physical quantities and has the fixed value
25.1
where the approximate value of is used whenever three-digit accuracy is sufficient. The speed of
light through matter is less than it is in a vacuum, because light interacts with atoms in a material. The speed of light
depends strongly on the type of material, since its interaction with different atoms, crystal lattices, and other
substructures varies. We define theindex of refraction of a material to be
25.2
PAGE: 1122
1104 25 • Geometric Optics
where is the observed speed of light in the material. Since the speed of light is always less than in matter and
equals only in a vacuum, the index of refraction is always greater than or equal to one.
Value of the Speed of Light
25.3
Index of Refraction
25.4
That is, .Table 25.1gives the indices of refraction for some representative substances. The values are listed
for a particular wavelength of light, because they vary slightly with wavelength. (This can have important effects,
such as colors produced by a prism.) Note that for gases, is close to 1.0. This seems reasonable, since atoms in
gases are widely separated and light travels at in the vacuum between atoms. It is common to take for gases
unless great precision is needed. Although the speed of light in a medium varies considerably from its value in a
vacuum, it is still a large speed.
Medium n
Gases at , 1 atm
Air 1.000293
Carbon dioxide 1.00045
Hydrogen 1.000139
Oxygen 1.000271
Liquids at
Benzene 1.501
Carbon disulfide 1.628
Carbon tetrachloride 1.461
Ethanol 1.361
Glycerine 1.473
Water, fresh 1.333
Solids at
Diamond 2.419
TABLE25.1Index of Refraction in
Various Media
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1123
25.3 • The Law of Refraction 1105
Medium n
Fluorite 1.434
Glass, crown 1.52
Glass, flint 1.66
Ice at 1.309
Polystyrene 1.49
Plexiglas 1.51
Quartz, crystalline 1.544
Quartz, fused 1.458
Sodium chloride 1.544
Zircon 1.923
TABLE25.1Index of Refraction in
Various Media
EXAMPLE 25.1
Speed of Light in Matter
Calculate the speed of light in zircon, a material used in jewelry to imitate diamond.
Strategy
The speed of light in a material, , can be calculated from the index of refraction of the material using the equation
.
Solution
The equation for index of refraction states that . Rearranging this to determine gives
25.5
The index of refraction for zircon is given as 1.923 inTable 25.1, and is given in the equation for speed of light.
Entering these values in the last expression gives
25.6
Discussion
This speed is slightly larger than half the speed of light in a vacuum and is still high compared with speeds we
normally experience. The only substance listed inTable 25.1that has a greater index of refraction than zircon is
diamond. We shall see later that the large index of refraction for zircon makes it sparkle more than glass, but less
than diamond.
PAGE: 1124
1106 25 • Geometric Optics
Law of Refraction
Figure 25.12shows how a ray of light changes direction when it passes from one medium to another. As before, the
angles are measured relative to a perpendicular to the surface at the point where the light ray crosses it. (Some of
the incident light will be reflected from the surface, but for now we will concentrate on the light that is transmitted.)
The change in direction of the light ray depends on how the speed of light changes. The change in the speed of light
is related to the indices of refraction of the media involved. In the situations shown inFigure 25.12, medium 2 has a
greater index of refraction than medium 1. This means that the speed of light is less in medium 2 than in medium 1.
Note that as shown inFigure 25.12(a), the direction of the ray moves closer to the perpendicular when it slows
down. Conversely, as shown inFigure 25.12(b), the direction of the ray moves away from the perpendicular when it
speeds up. The path is exactly reversible. In both cases, you can imagine what happens by thinking about pushing a
lawn mower from a footpath onto grass, and vice versa. Going from the footpath to grass, the front wheels are
slowed and pulled to the side as shown. This is the same change in direction as for light when it goes from a fast
medium to a slow one. When going from the grass to the footpath, the front wheels can move faster and the mower
changes direction as shown. This, too, is the same change in direction as for light going from slow to fast.
FIGURE25.12The change in direction of a light ray depends on how the speed of light changes when it crosses from one medium to
another. The speed of light is greater in medium 1 than in medium 2 in the situations shown here. (a) A ray of light moves closer to the
perpendicular when it slows down. This is analogous to what happens when a lawn mower goes from a footpath to grass. (b) A ray of light
moves away from the perpendicular when it speeds up. This is analogous to what happens when a lawn mower goes from grass to footpath.
The paths are exactly reversible.
The amount that a light ray changes its direction depends both on the incident angle and the amount that the speed
changes. For a ray at a given incident angle, a large change in speed causes a large change in direction, and thus a
large change in angle. The exact mathematical relationship is thelaw of refraction, or “Snell’s Law,” which is stated
in equation form as
25.7
Here and are the indices of refraction for medium 1 and 2, and and are the angles between the rays and
the perpendicular in medium 1 and 2, as shown inFigure 25.12. The incoming ray is called the incident ray and the
outgoing ray the refracted ray, and the associated angles the incident angle and the refracted angle. The law of
refraction is also called Snell’s law after the Dutch mathematician Willebrord Snell (1591–1626). While the law has
been named after Snell, the Arabian physicist, Ibn Sahl, found the law of refraction in 984 and used it in his workOn
Burning Mirrors and Lenses.Snell’s experiments showed that the law of refraction was obeyed and that a
characteristic index of refraction could be assigned to a given medium. Snell was not aware that the speed of light
varied in different media, but through experiments he was able to determine indices of refraction from the way light
rays changed direction.
The Law of Refraction
25.8
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1125
25.3 • The Law of Refraction 1107
Take-Home Experiment: A Broken Pencil
A classic observation of refraction occurs when a pencil is placed in a glass half filled with water. Do this and
observe the shape of the pencil when you look at the pencil sideways, that is, through air, glass, water. Explain
your observations. Draw ray diagrams for the situation.
EXAMPLE 25.2
Determine the Index of Refraction from Refraction Data
Find the index of refraction for medium 2 inFigure 25.12(a), assuming medium 1 is air and given the incident angle
is and the angle of refraction is .
Strategy
The index of refraction for air is taken to be 1 in most cases (and up to four significant figures, it is 1.000). Thus
here. From the given information, and . With this information, the only unknown in
Snell’s law is , so that it can be used to find this unknown.
Solution
Snell’s law is
25.9
Rearranging to isolate gives
25.10
Entering known values,
25.11
Discussion
This is the index of refraction for water, and Snell could have determined it by measuring the angles and performing
this calculation. He would then have found 1.33 to be the appropriate index of refraction for water in all other
situations, such as when a ray passes from water to glass. Today we can verify that the index of refraction is related
to the speed of light in a medium by measuring that speed directly.
EXAMPLE 25.3
A Larger Change in Direction
Suppose that in a situation like that inExample 25.2, light goes from air to diamond and that the incident angle is
. Calculate the angle of refraction in the diamond.
Strategy
Again the index of refraction for air is taken to be , and we are given . We can look up the index
of refraction for diamond inTable 25.1, finding . The only unknown in Snell’s law is , which we wish to
determine.
Solution
Solving Snell’s law for sin yields
PAGE: 1126
1108 25 • Geometric Optics
25.12
Entering known values,
25.13
The angle is thus
25.14
Discussion
For the same angle of incidence, the angle of refraction in diamond is significantly smaller than in water (
rather than —see the preceding example). This means there is a larger change in direction in diamond. The cause
of a large change in direction is a large change in the index of refraction (or speed). In general, the larger the change
in speed, the greater the effect on the direction of the ray.
25.4 Total Internal Reflection
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the phenomenon of total internal reflection.
• Describe the workings and uses of fiber optics.
• Analyze the reason for the sparkle of diamonds.
A good-quality mirror may reflect more than 90% of the light that falls on it, absorbing the rest. But it would be
useful to have a mirror that reflects all of the light that falls on it. Interestingly, we can producetotal reflectionusing
an aspect ofrefraction.
Consider what happens when a ray of light strikes the surface between two materials, such as is shown inFigure
25.13(a). Part of the light crosses the boundary and is refracted; the rest is reflected. If, as shown in the figure, the
index of refraction for the second medium is less than for the first, the ray bends away from the perpendicular.
(Since , the angle of refraction is greater than the angle of incidence—that is, .) Now imagine what
happens as the incident angle is increased. This causes to increase also. The largest the angle of refraction can
be is , as shown inFigure 25.13(b).Thecritical angle for a combination of materials is defined to be the
incident angle that produces an angle of refraction of . That is, is the incident angle for which . If
the incident angle is greater than the critical angle, as shown inFigure 25.13(c), then all of the light is reflected
back into medium 1, a condition calledtotal internal reflection.
Critical Angle
The incident angle that produces an angle of refraction of is called the critical angle, .
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1127
25.4 • Total Internal Reflection 1109
FIGURE25.13(a) A ray of light crosses a boundary where the speed of light increases and the index of refraction decreases. That is,
. The ray bends away from the perpendicular. (b) The critical angle is the one for which the angle of refraction is . (c) Total
internal reflection occurs when the incident angle is greater than the critical angle.
Snell’s law states the relationship between angles and indices of refraction. It is given by
25.15
When the incident angle equals the critical angle ( ), the angle of refraction is ( ). Noting that
, Snell’s law in this case becomes
25.16
The critical angle for a given combination of materials is thus
25.17
Total internal reflection occurs for any incident angle greater than the critical angle , and it can only occur when
the second medium has an index of refraction less than the first. Note the above equation is written for a light ray
that travels in medium 1 and reflects from medium 2, as shown in the figure.
PAGE: 1128
1110 25 • Geometric Optics
EXAMPLE 25.4
How Big is the Critical Angle Here?
What is the critical angle for light traveling in a polystyrene (a type of plastic) pipe surrounded by air?
Strategy
The index of refraction for polystyrene is found to be 1.49 inFigure 25.14, and the index of refraction of air can be
taken to be 1.00, as before. Thus, the condition that the second medium (air) has an index of refraction less than the
first (plastic) is satisfied, and the equation can be used to find the critical angle . Here, then,
and .
Solution
The critical angle is given by
25.18
Substituting the identified values gives
25.19
Discussion
This means that any ray of light inside the plastic that strikes the surface at an angle greater than will be
totally reflected. This will make the inside surface of the clear plastic a perfect mirror for such rays without any need
for the silvering used on common mirrors. Different combinations of materials have different critical angles, but any
combination with can produce total internal reflection. The same calculation as made here shows that the
critical angle for a ray going from water to air is , while that from diamond to air is , and that from flint
glass to crown glass is . There is no total reflection for rays going in the other direction—for example, from air to
water—since the condition that the second medium must have a smaller index of refraction is not satisfied. A
number of interesting applications of total internal reflection follow.
Fiber Optics: Endoscopes to Telephones
Fiber optics is one application of total internal reflection that is in wide use. In communications, it is used to
transmit telephone, internet, and cable TV signals.Fiber opticsemploys the transmission of light down fibers of
plastic or glass. Because the fibers are thin, light entering one is likely to strike the inside surface at an angle greater
than the critical angle and, thus, be totally reflected (SeeFigure 25.14.) The index of refraction outside the fiber
must be smaller than inside, a condition that is easily satisfied by coating the outside of the fiber with a material
having an appropriate refractive index. In fact, most fibers have a varying refractive index to allow more light to be
guided along the fiber through total internal refraction. Rays are reflected around corners as shown, making the
fibers into tiny light pipes.
FIGURE25.14Light entering a thin fiber may strike the inside surface at large or grazing angles and is completely reflected if these angles
exceed the critical angle. Such rays continue down the fiber, even following it around corners, since the angles of reflection and incidence
remain large.
Bundles of fibers can be used to transmit an image without a lens, as illustrated inFigure 25.15. The output of a
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1129
25.4 • Total Internal Reflection 1111
device called anendoscopeis shown inFigure 25.15(b). Endoscopes are used to explore the body through various
orifices or minor incisions. Light is transmitted down one fiber bundle to illuminate internal parts, and the reflected
light is transmitted back out through another to be observed. Surgery can be performed, such as arthroscopic
surgery on the knee joint, employing cutting tools attached to and observed with the endoscope. Samples can also
be obtained, such as by lassoing an intestinal polyp for external examination.
Fiber optics has revolutionized surgical techniques and observations within the body. There are a host of medical
diagnostic and therapeutic uses. The flexibility of the fiber optic bundle allows it to navigate around difficult and
small regions in the body, such as the intestines, the heart, blood vessels, and joints. Transmission of an intense
laser beam to burn away obstructing plaques in major arteries as well as delivering light to activate chemotherapy
drugs are becoming commonplace. Optical fibers have in fact enabled microsurgery and remote surgery where the
incisions are small and the surgeon’s fingers do not need to touch the diseased tissue.
FIGURE25.15(a) An image is transmitted by a bundle of fibers that have fixed neighbors. (b) An endoscope is used to probe the body, both
transmitting light to the interior and returning an image such as the one shown. (credit: Med_Chaos, Wikimedia Commons)
Fibers in bundles are surrounded by a cladding material that has a lower index of refraction than the core. (See
Figure 25.16.) The cladding prevents light from being transmitted between fibers in a bundle. Without cladding, light
could pass between fibers in contact, since their indices of refraction are identical. Since no light gets into the
cladding (there is total internal reflection back into the core), none can be transmitted between clad fibers that are
in contact with one another. The cladding prevents light from escaping out of the fiber; instead most of the light is
propagated along the length of the fiber, minimizing the loss of signal and ensuring that a quality image is formed at
the other end. The cladding and an additional protective layer make optical fibers flexible and durable.
FIGURE25.16Fibers in bundles are clad by a material that has a lower index of refraction than the core to ensure total internal reflection,
even when fibers are in contact with one another. This shows a single fiber with its cladding.
Cladding
The cladding prevents light from being transmitted between fibers in a bundle.
Special tiny lenses that can be attached to the ends of bundles of fibers are being designed and fabricated. Light
emerging from a fiber bundle can be focused and a tiny spot can be imaged. In some cases the spot can be scanned,
PAGE: 1130
1112 25 • Geometric Optics
allowing quality imaging of a region inside the body. Special minute optical filters inserted at the end of the fiber
bundle have the capacity to image tens of microns below the surface without cutting the surface—non-intrusive
diagnostics. This is particularly useful for determining the extent of cancers in the stomach and bowel.
Most telephone conversations and Internet communications are now carried by laser signals along optical fibers.
Extensive optical fiber cables have been placed on the ocean floor and underground to enable optical
communications. Optical fiber communication systems offer several advantages over electrical (copper) based
systems, particularly for long distances. The fibers can be made so transparent that light can travel many kilometers
before it becomes dim enough to require amplification—much superior to copper conductors. This property of
optical fibers is calledlow loss. Lasers emit light with characteristics that allow far more conversations in one fiber
than are possible with electric signals on a single conductor. This property of optical fibers is calledhigh bandwidth.
Optical signals in one fiber do not produce undesirable effects in other adjacent fibers. This property of optical fibers
is calledreduced crosstalk. We shall explore the unique characteristics of laser radiation in a later chapter.
Corner Reflectors and Diamonds
A light ray that strikes an object consisting of two mutually perpendicular reflecting surfaces is reflected back
exactly parallel to the direction from which it came. This is true whenever the reflecting surfaces are perpendicular,
and it is independent of the angle of incidence. Such an object, shown inFigure 25.17, is called acorner reflector,
since the light bounces from its inside corner. Many inexpensive reflector buttons on bicycles, cars, and warning
signs have corner reflectors designed to return light in the direction from which it originated. It was more expensive
for astronauts to place one on the moon. Laser signals can be bounced from that corner reflector to measure the
gradually increasing distance to the moon with great precision.
FIGURE25.17(a) Astronauts placed a corner reflector on the moon to measure its gradually increasing orbital distance. (credit: NASA) (b)
The bright spots on these bicycle safety reflectors are reflections of the flash of the camera that took this picture on a dark night. (credit:
Julo, Wikimedia Commons)
Corner reflectors are perfectly efficient when the conditions for total internal reflection are satisfied. With common
materials, it is easy to obtain a critical angle that is less than . One use of these perfect mirrors is in binoculars,
as shown inFigure 25.18. Another use is in periscopes found in submarines.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1131
25.4 • Total Internal Reflection 1113
FIGURE25.18These binoculars employ corner reflectors with total internal reflection to get light to the observer’s eyes.
The Sparkle of Diamonds
Total internal reflection, coupled with a large index of refraction, explains why diamonds sparkle more than other
materials. The critical angle for a diamond-to-air surface is only , and so when light enters a diamond, it has
trouble getting back out. (SeeFigure 25.19.) Although light freely enters the diamond, it can exit only if it makes an
angle less than . Facets on diamonds are specifically intended to make this unlikely, so that the light can exit
only in certain places. Good diamonds are very clear, so that the light makes many internal reflections and is
concentrated at the few places it can exit—hence the sparkle. (Zircon is a natural gemstone that has an exceptionally
large index of refraction, but not as large as diamond, so it is not as highly prized. Cubic zirconia is manufactured and
has an even higher index of refraction ( ), but still less than that of diamond.) The colors you see emerging
from a sparkling diamond are not due to the diamond’s color, which is usually nearly colorless. Those colors result
from dispersion, the topic ofDispersion: The Rainbow and Prisms. Colored diamonds get their color from structural
defects of the crystal lattice and the inclusion of minute quantities of graphite and other materials. The Argyle Mine
in Western Australia produces around 90% of the world’s pink, red, champagne, and cognac diamonds, while
around 50% of the world’s clear diamonds come from central and southern Africa.
FIGURE25.19Light cannot easily escape a diamond, because its critical angle with air is so small. Most reflections are total, and the facets
are placed so that light can exit only in particular ways—thus concentrating the light and making the diamond sparkle.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Bending Light
Explore bending of light between two media with different indices of refraction. See how changing from air to water
to glass changes the bending angle. Play with prisms of different shapes and make rainbows.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/25-4-total-internal-reflection)
PAGE: 1132
1114 25 • Geometric Optics
25.5 Dispersion: The Rainbow and Prisms
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the phenomenon of dispersion and discuss its advantages and disadvantages.
Everyone enjoys the spectacle and surprise of rainbows. They’ve been hailed as symbols of hope and spirituality and
are the subject of stories and myths across the world’s cultures. Just how does sunlight falling on water droplets
cause the multicolored image we see, and what else does this phenomenon tell us about light, color, and radiation?
Working in his native Persia (now Iran), Kamal al-Din Hasan ibn Ali ibn Hasan al-Farisi (1267–1319) designed a
series of innovative experiments to answer this question and clarify the explanations of many earlier scientists. At
that time, there were no microscopes to examine tiny drops of water similar to those in the atmosphere, so Farisi
created an enormous drop of water. He filled a large glass vessel with water and placed it inside a camera obscura,
in which he could carefully control the entry of light. Using a series of careful observations on the resulting
multicolored spectra of light, he deduced and confirmed that the droplets split—or decompose—white light into the
colors of the rainbow. Farisi’s contemporary, Theodoric of Freiberg (in Germany), performed similar experiments
using other equipment. Both relied on the prior work of Ibn al-Haytham, often known as the founder of optics and
among the first to formalize a scientific method.
FIGURE25.20The colors of the rainbow (a) and those produced by a prism (b) are identical. (credit: Alfredo55, Wikimedia Commons;
NASA)
We see about six colors in a rainbow—red, orange, yellow, green, blue, and violet; sometimes indigo is listed, too.
Those colors are associated with different wavelengths of light, as shown inFigure 25.21. When our eye receives
pure-wavelength light, we tend to see only one of the six colors, depending on wavelength. The thousands of other
hues we can sense in other situations are our eye’s response to various mixtures of wavelengths. White light, in
particular, is a fairly uniform mixture of all visible wavelengths. Sunlight, considered to be white, actually appears to
be a bit yellow because of its mixture of wavelengths, but it does contain all visible wavelengths. The sequence of
colors in rainbows is the same sequence as the colors plotted versus wavelength inFigure 25.21. What this implies
is that white light is spread out according to wavelength in a rainbow.Dispersionis defined as the spreading of
white light into its full spectrum of wavelengths. More technically, dispersion occurs whenever there is a process
that changes the direction of light in a manner that depends on wavelength. Dispersion, as a general phenomenon,
can occur for any type of wave and always involves wavelength-dependent processes.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1133
25.5 • Dispersion: The Rainbow and Prisms 1115
Dispersion
Dispersion is defined to be the spreading of white light into its full spectrum of wavelengths.
FIGURE25.21Even though rainbows are associated with seven colors, the rainbow is a continuous distribution of colors according to
wavelengths.
Refraction is responsible for dispersion in rainbows and many other situations. The angle of refraction depends on
the index of refraction, as we saw inThe Law of Refraction. We know that the index of refraction depends on the
medium. But for a given medium, also depends on wavelength. (SeeTable 25.2. Note that, for a given medium,
increases as wavelength decreases and is greatest for violet light. Thus violet light is bent more than red light, as
shown for a prism inFigure 25.22(b), and the light is dispersed into the same sequence of wavelengths as seen in
Figure 25.20andFigure 25.21.
Making Connections: Dispersion
Any type of wave can exhibit dispersion. Sound waves, all types of electromagnetic waves, and water waves can
be dispersed according to wavelength. Dispersion occurs whenever the speed of propagation depends on
wavelength, thus separating and spreading out various wavelengths. Dispersion may require special
circumstances and can result in spectacular displays such as in the production of a rainbow. This is also true for
sound, since all frequencies ordinarily travel at the same speed. If you listen to sound through a long tube, such
as a vacuum cleaner hose, you can easily hear it is dispersed by interaction with the tube. Dispersion, in fact, can
reveal a great deal about what the wave has encountered that disperses its wavelengths. The dispersion of
electromagnetic radiation from outer space, for example, has revealed much about what exists between the
stars—the so-called empty space.
Red (660 Orange (610 Yellow (580 Green (550 Blue (470 Violet (410
Medium
nm) nm) nm) nm) nm) nm)
Water 1.331 1.332 1.333 1.335 1.338 1.342
Diamond 2.410 2.415 2.417 2.426 2.444 2.458
Glass,
1.512 1.514 1.518 1.519 1.524 1.530
crown
Glass, flint 1.662 1.665 1.667 1.674 1.684 1.698
Polystyrene 1.488 1.490 1.492 1.493 1.499 1.506
Quartz,
1.455 1.456 1.458 1.459 1.462 1.468
fused
TABLE25.2Index of Refractionnin Selected Media at Various Wavelengths
PAGE: 1134
1116 25 • Geometric Optics
FIGURE25.22(a) A pure wavelength of light falls onto a prism and is refracted at both surfaces. (b) White light is dispersed by the prism
(shown exaggerated). Since the index of refraction varies with wavelength, the angles of refraction vary with wavelength. A sequence of red
to violet is produced, because the index of refraction increases steadily with decreasing wavelength.
Rainbows are produced by a combination of refraction and reflection. You may have noticed that you see a rainbow
only when you look away from the sun. Light enters a drop of water and is reflected from the back of the drop, as
shown inFigure 25.23. The light is refracted both as it enters and as it leaves the drop. Since the index of refraction
of water varies with wavelength, the light is dispersed, and a rainbow is observed, as shown inFigure 25.24(a).
(There is no dispersion caused by reflection at the back surface, since the law of reflection does not depend on
wavelength.) The actual rainbow of colors seen by an observer depends on the myriad of rays being refracted and
reflected toward the observer’s eyes from numerous drops of water. The effect is most spectacular when the
background is dark, as in stormy weather, but can also be observed in waterfalls and lawn sprinklers. The arc of a
rainbow comes from the need to be looking at a specific angle relative to the direction of the sun, as illustrated in
Figure 25.24(b). (If there are two reflections of light within the water drop, another “secondary” rainbow is
produced. This rare event produces an arc that lies above the primary rainbow arc—seeFigure 25.24(c).)
FIGURE25.23Part of the light falling on this water drop enters and is reflected from the back of the drop. This light is refracted and
dispersed both as it enters and as it leaves the drop.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1135
25.5 • Dispersion: The Rainbow and Prisms 1117
FIGURE25.24(a) Different colors emerge in different directions, and so you must look at different locations to see the various colors of a
rainbow. (b) The arc of a rainbow results from the fact that a line between the observer and any point on the arc must make the correct
angle with the parallel rays of sunlight to receive the refracted rays. (c) Double rainbow. (credit: Nicholas, Wikimedia Commons)
Dispersion may produce beautiful rainbows, but it can cause problems in optical systems. White light used to
transmit messages in a fiber is dispersed, spreading out in time and eventually overlapping with other messages.
Since a laser produces a nearly pure wavelength, its light experiences little dispersion, an advantage over white light
for transmission of information. In contrast, dispersion of electromagnetic waves coming to us from outer space can
be used to determine the amount of matter they pass through. As with many phenomena, dispersion can be useful
or a nuisance, depending on the situation and our human goals.
PAGE: 1136
1118 25 • Geometric Optics
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Geometric Optics
How does a lens form an image? See how light rays are refracted by a lens. Watch how the image changes when you
adjust the focal length of the lens, move the object, move the lens, or move the screen.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/25-5-dispersion-the-rainbow-and-
prisms)
25.6 Image Formation by Lenses
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• List the rules for ray tracking for thin lenses.
• Illustrate the formation of images using the technique of ray tracking.
• Determine power of a lens given the focal length.
Lenses are found in a huge array of optical instruments, ranging from a simple magnifying glass to the eye to a
camera’s zoom lens. In this section, we will use the law of refraction to explore the properties of lenses and how
they form images.
The wordlensderives from the Latin word for a lentil bean, the shape of which is similar to the convex lens inFigure
25.25. The convex lens shown has been shaped so that all light rays that enter it parallel to its axis cross one
another at a single point on the opposite side of the lens. (The axis is defined to be a line normal to the lens at its
center, as shown inFigure 25.25.) Such a lens is called aconverging (or convex) lensfor the converging effect it has
on light rays. An expanded view of the path of one ray through the lens is shown, to illustrate how the ray changes
direction both as it enters and as it leaves the lens. Since the index of refraction of the lens is greater than that of air,
the ray moves towards the perpendicular as it enters and away from the perpendicular as it leaves. (This is in
accordance with the law of refraction.) Due to the lens’s shape, light is thus bent toward the axis at both surfaces.
The point at which the rays cross is defined to be thefocal pointF of the lens. The distance from the center of the
lens to its focal point is defined to be thefocal length of the lens.Figure 25.26shows how a converging lens, such
as that in a magnifying glass, can converge the nearly parallel light rays from the sun to a small spot.
FIGURE25.25Rays of light entering a converging lens parallel to its axis converge at its focal point F. (Ray 2 lies on the axis of the lens.) The
distance from the center of the lens to the focal point is the lens’s focal length . An expanded view of the path taken by ray 1 shows the
perpendiculars and the angles of incidence and refraction at both surfaces.
Converging or Convex Lens
The lens in which light rays that enter it parallel to its axis cross one another at a single point on the opposite
side with a converging effect is called converging lens.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1137
25.6 • Image Formation by Lenses 1119
Focal Point F
The point at which the light rays cross is called the focal point F of the lens.
Focal Length
The distance from the center of the lens to its focal point is called focal length .
FIGURE25.26Sunlight focused by a converging magnifying glass can burn paper. Light rays from the sun are nearly parallel and cross at
the focal point of the lens. The more powerful the lens, the closer to the lens the rays will cross.
The greater effect a lens has on light rays, the more powerful it is said to be. For example, a powerful converging
lens will focus parallel light rays closer to itself and will have a smaller focal length than a weak lens. The light will
also focus into a smaller and more intense spot for a more powerful lens. Thepower of a lens is defined to be the
inverse of its focal length. In equation form, this is
25.20
Power
Thepower of a lens is defined to be the inverse of its focal length. In equation form, this is
25.21
where is the focal length of the lens, which must be given in meters (and not cm or mm). The power of a lens
has the unit diopters (D), provided that the focal length is given in meters. That is, , or . (Note
that this power (optical power, actually) is not the same as power in watts defined inWork, Energy, and Energy
Resources. It is a concept related to the effect of optical devices on light.) Optometrists prescribe common
spectacles and contact lenses in units of diopters.
EXAMPLE 25.5
What is the Power of a Common Magnifying Glass?
Suppose you take a magnifying glass out on a sunny day and you find that it concentrates sunlight to a small spot
8.00 cm away from the lens. What are the focal length and power of the lens?
PAGE: 1138
1120 25 • Geometric Optics
Strategy
The situation here is the same as those shown inFigure 25.25andFigure 25.26. The Sun is so far away that the
Sun’s rays are nearly parallel when they reach Earth. The magnifying glass is a convex (or converging) lens, focusing
the nearly parallel rays of sunlight. Thus the focal length of the lens is the distance from the lens to the spot, and its
power is the inverse of this distance (in m).
Solution
The focal length of the lens is the distance from the center of the lens to the spot, given to be 8.00 cm. Thus,
25.22
To find the power of the lens, we must first convert the focal length to meters; then, we substitute this value into the
equation for power. This gives
25.23
Discussion
This is a relatively powerful lens. The power of a lens in diopters should not be confused with the familiar concept of
power in watts. It is an unfortunate fact that the word “power” is used for two completely different concepts. If you
examine a prescription for eyeglasses, you will note lens powers given in diopters. If you examine the label on a
motor, you will note energy consumption rate given as a power in watts.
Figure 25.27shows a concave lens and the effect it has on rays of light that enter it parallel to its axis (the path
taken by ray 2 in the figure is the axis of the lens). The concave lens is adiverging lens, because it causes the light
rays to bend away (diverge) from its axis. In this case, the lens has been shaped so that all light rays entering it
parallel to its axis appear to originate from the same point, , defined to be the focal point of a diverging lens. The
distance from the center of the lens to the focal point is again called the focal length of the lens. Note that the
focal length and power of a diverging lens are defined to be negative. For example, if the distance to inFigure
25.27is 5.00 cm, then the focal length is and the power of the lens is . An expanded view
of the path of one ray through the lens is shown in the figure to illustrate how the shape of the lens, together with
the law of refraction, causes the ray to follow its particular path and be diverged.
FIGURE25.27Rays of light entering a diverging lens parallel to its axis are diverged, and all appear to originate at its focal point . The
dashed lines are not rays—they indicate the directions from which the rays appear to come. The focal length of a diverging lens is
negative. An expanded view of the path taken by ray 1 shows the perpendiculars and the angles of incidence and refraction at both
surfaces.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1139
25.6 • Image Formation by Lenses 1121
Diverging Lens
A lens that causes the light rays to bend away from its axis is called a diverging lens.
As noted in the initial discussion of the law of refraction inThe Law of Refraction, the paths of light rays are exactly
reversible. This means that the direction of the arrows could be reversed for all of the rays inFigure 25.25and
Figure 25.27. For example, if a point light source is placed at the focal point of a convex lens, as shown inFigure
25.28, parallel light rays emerge from the other side.
FIGURE25.28A small light source, like a light bulb filament, placed at the focal point of a convex lens, results in parallel rays of light
emerging from the other side. The paths are exactly the reverse of those shown inFigure 25.25. This technique is used in lighthouses and
sometimes in traffic lights to produce a directional beam of light from a source that emits light in all directions.
Ray Tracing and Thin Lenses
Ray tracingis the technique of determining or following (tracing) the paths that light rays take. For rays passing
through matter, the law of refraction is used to trace the paths. Here we use ray tracing to help us understand the
action of lenses in situations ranging from forming images on film to magnifying small print to correcting
nearsightedness. While ray tracing for complicated lenses, such as those found in sophisticated cameras, may
require computer techniques, there is a set of simple rules for tracing rays through thin lenses. Athin lensis defined
to be one whose thickness allows rays to refract, as illustrated inFigure 25.25, but does not allow properties such
as dispersion and aberrations. An ideal thin lens has two refracting surfaces but the lens is thin enough to assume
that light rays bend only once. A thin symmetrical lens has two focal points, one on either side and both at the same
distance from the lens. (SeeFigure 25.29.) Another important characteristic of a thin lens is that light rays through
its center are deflected by a negligible amount, as seen inFigure 25.30.
Thin Lens
A thin lens is defined to be one whose thickness allows rays to refract but does not allow properties such as
dispersion and aberrations.
Take-Home Experiment: A Visit to the Optician
Look through your eyeglasses (or those of a friend) backward and forward and comment on whether they act like
thin lenses.
PAGE: 1140
1122 25 • Geometric Optics
FIGURE25.29Thin lenses have the same focal length on either side. (a) Parallel light rays entering a converging lens from the right cross at
its focal point on the left. (b) Parallel light rays entering a diverging lens from the right seem to come from the focal point on the right.
FIGURE25.30The light ray through the center of a thin lens is deflected by a negligible amount and is assumed to emerge parallel to its
original path (shown as a shaded line).
Using paper, pencil, and a straight edge, ray tracing can accurately describe the operation of a lens. The rules for ray
tracing for thin lenses are based on the illustrations already discussed:
1. A ray entering a converging lens parallel to its axis passes through the focal point F of the lens on the other side.
(See rays 1 and 3 inFigure 25.25.)
2. A ray entering a diverging lens parallel to its axis seems to come from the focal point F. (See rays 1 and 3 in
Figure 25.27.)
3. A ray passing through the center of either a converging or a diverging lens does not change direction. (See
Figure 25.30, and see ray 2 inFigure 25.25andFigure 25.27.)
4. A ray entering a converging lens through its focal point exits parallel to its axis. (The reverse of rays 1 and 3 in
Figure 25.25.)
5. A ray that enters a diverging lens by heading toward the focal point on the opposite side exits parallel to the
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1141
25.6 • Image Formation by Lenses 1123
axis. (The reverse of rays 1 and 3 inFigure 25.27.)
Rules for Ray Tracing
1. A ray entering a converging lens parallel to its axis passes through the focal point F of the lens on the other
side.
2. A ray entering a diverging lens parallel to its axis seems to come from the focal point F.
3. A ray passing through the center of either a converging or a diverging lens does not change direction.
4. A ray entering a converging lens through its focal point exits parallel to its axis.
5. A ray that enters a diverging lens by heading toward the focal point on the opposite side exits parallel to the
axis.
Image Formation by Thin Lenses
In some circumstances, a lens forms an obvious image, such as when a movie projector casts an image onto a
screen. In other cases, the image is less obvious. Where, for example, is the image formed by eyeglasses? We will
use ray tracing for thin lenses to illustrate how they form images, and we will develop equations to describe the
image formation quantitatively.
Consider an object some distance away from a converging lens, as shown inFigure 25.31. To find the location and
size of the image formed, we trace the paths of selected light rays originating from one point on the object, in this
case the top of the person’s head. The figure shows three rays from the top of the object that can be traced using the
ray tracing rules given above. (Rays leave this point going in many directions, but we concentrate on only a few with
paths that are easy to trace.) The first ray is one that enters the lens parallel to its axis and passes through the focal
point on the other side (rule 1). The second ray passes through the center of the lens without changing direction
(rule 3). The third ray passes through the nearer focal point on its way into the lens and leaves the lens parallel to its
axis (rule 4). The three rays cross at the same point on the other side of the lens. The image of the top of the
person’s head is located at this point. All rays that come from the same point on the top of the person’s head are
refracted in such a way as to cross at the point shown. Rays from another point on the object, such as her belt
buckle, will also cross at another common point, forming a complete image, as shown. Although three rays are
traced inFigure 25.31, only two are necessary to locate the image. It is best to trace rays for which there are simple
ray tracing rules. Before applying ray tracing to other situations, let us consider the example shown inFigure 25.31
in more detail.
PAGE: 1142
1124 25 • Geometric Optics
FIGURE25.31Ray tracing is used to locate the image formed by a lens. Rays originating from the same point on the object are traced—the
three chosen rays each follow one of the rules for ray tracing, so that their paths are easy to determine. The image is located at the point
where the rays cross. In this case, a real image—one that can be projected on a screen—is formed.
The image formed inFigure 25.31is areal image, meaning that it can be projected. That is, light rays from one point
on the object actually cross at the location of the image and can be projected onto a screen, a piece of film, or the
retina of an eye, for example.Figure 25.32shows how such an image would be projected onto film by a camera lens.
This figure also shows how a real image is projected onto the retina by the lens of an eye. Note that the image is
there whether it is projected onto a screen or not.
Real Image
The image in which light rays from one point on the object actually cross at the location of the image and can be
projected onto a screen, a piece of film, or the retina of an eye is called a real image.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1143
25.6 • Image Formation by Lenses 1125
FIGURE25.32Real images can be projected. (a) A real image of the person is projected onto film. (b) The converging nature of the multiple
surfaces that make up the eye result in the projection of a real image on the retina.
Several important distances appear inFigure 25.31. We define to be the object distance, the distance of an
object from the center of a lens.Image distance is defined to be the distance of the image from the center of a
lens. The height of the object and height of the image are given the symbols and , respectively. Images that
appear upright relative to the object have heights that are positive and those that are inverted have negative heights.
Using the rules of ray tracing and making a scale drawing with paper and pencil, like that inFigure 25.31, we can
accurately describe the location and size of an image. But the real benefit of ray tracing is in visualizing how images
are formed in a variety of situations. To obtain numerical information, we use a pair of equations that can be derived
from a geometric analysis of ray tracing for thin lenses. Thethin lens equationsare
25.24
and
25.25
We define the ratio of image height to object height ( ) to be themagnification . (The minus sign in the
equation above will be discussed shortly.) The thin lens equations are broadly applicable to all situations involving
thin lenses (and “thin” mirrors, as we will see later). We will explore many features of image formation in the
following worked examples.
Image Distance
The distance of the image from the center of the lens is called image distance.
Thin Lens Equations and Magnification
25.26
25.27
PAGE: 1144
1126 25 • Geometric Optics
EXAMPLE 25.6
Finding the Image of a Light Bulb Filament by Ray Tracing and by the Thin Lens Equations
A clear glass light bulb is placed 0.750 m from a convex lens having a 0.500 m focal length, as shown inFigure
25.33. Use ray tracing to get an approximate location for the image. Then use the thin lens equations to calculate (a)
the location of the image and (b) its magnification. Verify that ray tracing and the thin lens equations produce
consistent results.
FIGURE25.33A light bulb placed 0.750 m from a lens having a 0.500 m focal length produces a real image on a poster board as discussed
in the example above. Ray tracing predicts the image location and size.
Strategy and Concept
Since the object is placed farther away from a converging lens than the focal length of the lens, this situation is
analogous to those illustrated inFigure 25.31andFigure 25.32. Ray tracing to scale should produce similar results
for . Numerical solutions for and can be obtained using the thin lens equations, noting that
.
Solutions (Ray tracing)
The ray tracing to scale inFigure 25.33shows two rays from a point on the bulb’s filament crossing about 1.50 m on
the far side of the lens. Thus the image distance is about 1.50 m. Similarly, the image height based on ray tracing
is greater than the object height by about a factor of 2, and the image is inverted. Thus is about –2. The minus sign
indicates that the image is inverted.
The thin lens equations can be used to find from the given information:
25.28
Rearranging to isolate gives
25.29
Entering known quantities gives a value for :
25.30
This must be inverted to find :
25.31
Note that another way to find is to rearrange the equation:
25.32
This yields the equation for the image distance as:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1145
25.6 • Image Formation by Lenses 1127
25.33
Note that there is no inverting here.
The thin lens equations can be used to find the magnification , since both and are known. Entering their
values gives
25.34
Discussion
Note that the minus sign causes the magnification to be negative when the image is inverted. Ray tracing and the
use of the thin lens equations produce consistent results. The thin lens equations give the most precise results,
being limited only by the accuracy of the given information. Ray tracing is limited by the accuracy with which you can
draw, but it is highly useful both conceptually and visually.
Real images, such as the one considered in the previous example, are formed by converging lenses whenever an
object is farther from the lens than its focal length. This is true for movie projectors, cameras, and the eye. We shall
refer to these ascase 1images. A case 1 image is formed when and is positive, as inFigure 25.34(a). (A
summary of the three cases or types of image formation appears at the end of this section.)
A different type of image is formed when an object, such as a person's face, is held close to a convex lens. The image
is upright and larger than the object, as seen inFigure 25.34(b), and so the lens is called a magnifier. If you slowly
pull the magnifier away from the face, you will see that the magnification steadily increases until the image begins to
blur. Pulling the magnifier even farther away produces an inverted image as seen inFigure 25.34(a). The distance at
which the image blurs, and beyond which it inverts, is the focal length of the lens. To use a convex lens as a
magnifier, the object must be closer to the converging lens than its focal length. This is called acase 2image. A case
2 image is formed when and is positive.
FIGURE25.34(a) When a converging lens is held farther away from the face than the lens’s focal length, an inverted image is formed. This
is a case 1 image. Note that the image is in focus but the face is not, because the image is much closer to the camera taking this photograph
than the face. (credit: DaMongMan, Flickr) (b) A magnified image of a face is produced by placing it closer to the converging lens than its
focal length. This is a case 2 image. (credit: Casey Fleser, Flickr)
Figure 25.35uses ray tracing to show how an image is formed when an object is held closer to a converging lens
PAGE: 1146
1128 25 • Geometric Optics
than its focal length. Rays coming from a common point on the object continue to diverge after passing through the
lens, but all appear to originate from a point at the location of the image. The image is on the same side of the lens
as the object and is farther away from the lens than the object. This image, like all case 2 images, cannot be
projected and, hence, is called avirtual image. Light rays only appear to originate at a virtual image; they do not
actually pass through that location in space. A screen placed at the location of a virtual image will receive only
diffuse light from the object, not focused rays from the lens. Additionally, a screen placed on the opposite side of the
lens will receive rays that are still diverging, and so no image will be projected on it. We can see the magnified image
with our eyes, because the lens of the eye converges the rays into a real image projected on our retina. Finally, we
note that a virtual image is upright and larger than the object, meaning that the magnification is positive and greater
than 1.
FIGURE25.35Ray tracing predicts the image location and size for an object held closer to a converging lens than its focal length. Ray 1
enters parallel to the axis and exits through the focal point on the opposite side, while ray 2 passes through the center of the lens without
changing path. The two rays continue to diverge on the other side of the lens, but both appear to come from a common point, locating the
upright, magnified, virtual image. This is a case 2 image.
Virtual Image
An image that is on the same side of the lens as the object and cannot be projected on a screen is called a virtual
image.
EXAMPLE 25.7
Image Produced by a Magnifying Glass
Suppose the book page inFigure 25.35(a) is held 7.50 cm from a convex lens of focal length 10.0 cm, such as a
typical magnifying glass might have. What magnification is produced?
Strategy and Concept
We are given that and , so we have a situation where the object is placed closer to the
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1147
25.6 • Image Formation by Lenses 1129
lens than its focal length. We therefore expect to get a case 2 virtual image with a positive magnification that is
greater than 1. Ray tracing produces an image like that shown inFigure 25.35, but we will use the thin lens
equations to get numerical solutions in this example.
Solution
To find the magnification , we try to use magnification equation, . We do not have a value for , so that
we must first find the location of the image using lens equation. (The procedure is the same as followed in the
preceding example, where and were known.) Rearranging the magnification equation to isolate gives
25.35
Entering known values, we obtain a value for :
25.36
This must be inverted to find :
25.37
Now the thin lens equation can be used to find the magnification , since both and are known. Entering their
values gives
25.38
Discussion
A number of results in this example are true of all case 2 images, as well as being consistent withFigure 25.35.
Magnification is indeed positive (as predicted), meaning the image is upright. The magnification is also greater than
1, meaning that the image is larger than the object—in this case, by a factor of 4. Note that the image distance is
negative. This means the image is on the same side of the lens as the object. Thus the image cannot be projected
and is virtual. (Negative values of occur for virtual images.) The image is farther from the lens than the object,
since the image distance is greater in magnitude than the object distance. The location of the image is not obvious
when you look through a magnifier. In fact, since the image is bigger than the object, you may think the image is
closer than the object. But the image is farther away, a fact that is useful in correcting farsightedness, as we shall
see in a later section.
A third type of image is formed by a diverging or concave lens. Try looking through eyeglasses meant to correct
nearsightedness. (SeeFigure 25.36.) You will see an image that is upright but smaller than the object. This means
that the magnification is positive but less than 1. The ray diagram inFigure 25.37shows that the image is on the
same side of the lens as the object and, hence, cannot be projected—it is a virtual image. Note that the image is
closer to the lens than the object. This is acase 3image, formed for any object by a negative focal length or
diverging lens.
FIGURE25.36A car viewed through a concave or diverging lens looks upright. This is a case 3 image. (credit: Daniel Oines, Flickr)
PAGE: 1148
1130 25 • Geometric Optics
FIGURE25.37Ray tracing predicts the image location and size for a concave or diverging lens. Ray 1 enters parallel to the axis and is bent
so that it appears to originate from the focal point. Ray 2 passes through the center of the lens without changing path. The two rays appear
to come from a common point, locating the upright image. This is a case 3 image, which is closer to the lens than the object and smaller in
height.
EXAMPLE 25.8
Image Produced by a Concave Lens
Suppose an object such as a book page is held 7.50 cm from a concave lens of focal length –10.0 cm. Such a lens
could be used in eyeglasses to correct pronounced nearsightedness. What magnification is produced?
Strategy and Concept
This example is identical to the preceding one, except that the focal length is negative for a concave or diverging
lens. The method of solution is thus the same, but the results are different in important ways.
Solution
To find the magnification , we must first find the image distance using thin lens equation
25.39
or its alternative rearrangement
25.40
We are given that and . Entering these yields a value for :
25.41
This must be inverted to find :
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1149
25.6 • Image Formation by Lenses 1131
25.42
Or
25.43
Now the magnification equation can be used to find the magnification , since both and are known. Entering
their values gives
25.44
Discussion
A number of results in this example are true of all case 3 images, as well as being consistent withFigure 25.37.
Magnification is positive (as predicted), meaning the image is upright. The magnification is also less than 1, meaning
the image is smaller than the object—in this case, a little over half its size. The image distance is negative, meaning
the image is on the same side of the lens as the object. (The image is virtual.) The image is closer to the lens than
the object, since the image distance is smaller in magnitude than the object distance. The location of the image is
not obvious when you look through a concave lens. In fact, since the image is smaller than the object, you may think
it is farther away. But the image is closer than the object, a fact that is useful in correcting nearsightedness, as we
shall see in a later section.
Table 25.3summarizes the three types of images formed by single thin lenses. These are referred to as case 1, 2,
and 3 images. Convex (converging) lenses can form either real or virtual images (cases 1 and 2, respectively),
whereas concave (diverging) lenses can form only virtual images (always case 3). Real images are always inverted,
but they can be either larger or smaller than the object. For example, a slide projector forms an image larger than
the slide, whereas a camera makes an image smaller than the object being photographed. Virtual images are always
upright and cannot be projected. Virtual images are larger than the object only in case 2, where a convex lens is
used. The virtual image produced by a concave lens is always smaller than the object—a case 3 image. We can see
and photograph virtual images only by using an additional lens to form a real image.
Type Formed when Image type d m
i
Case 1 positive, real positive negative
Case 2 positive, virtual negative positive
Case 3 negative virtual negative positive
TABLE25.3Three Types of Images Formed By Thin Lenses
InImage Formation by Mirrors, we shall see that mirrors can form exactly the same types of images as lenses.
Take-Home Experiment: Concentrating Sunlight
Find several lenses and determine whether they are converging or diverging. In general those that are thicker
near the edges are diverging and those that are thicker near the center are converging. On a bright sunny day
take the converging lenses outside and try focusing the sunlight onto a piece of paper. Determine the focal
lengths of the lenses. Be careful because the paper may start to burn, depending on the type of lens you have
selected.
PAGE: 1150
1132 25 • Geometric Optics
Problem-Solving Strategies for Lenses
Step 1. Examine the situation to determine that image formation by a lens is involved.
Step 2. Determine whether ray tracing, the thin lens equations, or both are to be employed. A sketch is very useful
even if ray tracing is not specifically required by the problem. Write symbols and values on the sketch.
Step 3. Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem (identify the unknowns).
Step 4. Make alist of what is given or can be inferred from the problem as stated (identify the knowns). It is helpful
to determine whether the situation involves a case 1, 2, or 3 image. While these are just names for types of images,
they have certain characteristics (given inTable 25.3) that can be of great use in solving problems.
Step 5. If ray tracing is required, use the ray tracing rules listed near the beginning of this section.
Step 6. Most quantitative problems require the use of the thin lens equations. These are solved in the usual manner
by substituting knowns and solving for unknowns. Several worked examples serve as guides.
Step 7. Check to see if the answer is reasonable: Does it make sense?If you have identified the type of image (case
1, 2, or 3), you should assess whether your answer is consistent with the type of image, magnification, and so on.
Misconception Alert
We do not realize that light rays are coming from every part of the object, passing through every part of the lens,
and all can be used to form the final image.
We generally feel the entire lens, or mirror, is needed to form an image. Actually, half a lens will form the same,
though a fainter, image.
25.7 Image Formation by Mirrors
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Illustrate image formation in a flat mirror.
• Explain with ray diagrams the formation of an image using spherical mirrors.
• Determine focal length and magnification given radius of curvature, distance of object and image.
We only have to look as far as the nearest bathroom to find an example of an image formed by a mirror. Images in
flat mirrors are the same size as the object and are located behind the mirror. Like lenses, mirrors can form a variety
of images. For example, dental mirrors may produce a magnified image, just as makeup mirrors do. Security mirrors
in shops, on the other hand, form images that are smaller than the object. We will use the law of reflection to
understand how mirrors form images, and we will find that mirror images are analogous to those formed by lenses.
Figure 25.38helps illustrate how a flat mirror forms an image. Two rays are shown emerging from the same point,
striking the mirror, and being reflected into the observer’s eye. The rays can diverge slightly, and both still get into
the eye. If the rays are extrapolated backward, they seem to originate from a common point behind the mirror,
locating the image. (The paths of the reflected rays into the eye are the same as if they had come directly from that
point behind the mirror.) Using the law of reflection—the angle of reflection equals the angle of incidence—we can
see that the image and object are the same distance from the mirror. This is a virtual image, since it cannot be
projected—the rays only appear to originate from a common point behind the mirror. Obviously, if you walk behind
the mirror, you cannot see the image, since the rays do not go there. But in front of the mirror, the rays behave
exactly as if they had come from behind the mirror, so that is where the image is situated.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1151
25.7 • Image Formation by Mirrors 1133
FIGURE25.38Two sets of rays from common points on an object are reflected by a flat mirror into the eye of an observer. The reflected
rays seem to originate from behind the mirror, locating the virtual image.
Now let us consider the focal length of a mirror—for example, the concave spherical mirrors inFigure 25.39. Rays of
light that strike the surface follow the law of reflection. For a mirror that is large compared with its radius of
curvature, as inFigure 25.39(a), we see that the reflected rays do not cross at the same point, and the mirror does
not have a well-defined focal point. If the mirror had the shape of a parabola, the rays would all cross at a single
point, and the mirror would have a well-defined focal point. But parabolic mirrors are much more expensive to make
than spherical mirrors. The solution is to use a mirror that is small compared with its radius of curvature, as shown
inFigure 25.39(b). (This is the mirror equivalent of the thin lens approximation.) To a very good approximation, this
mirror has a well-defined focal point at F that is the focal distance from the center of the mirror. The focal length
of a concave mirror is positive, since it is a converging mirror.
FIGURE25.39(a) Parallel rays reflected from a large spherical mirror do not all cross at a common point. (b) If a spherical mirror is small
compared with its radius of curvature, parallel rays are focused to a common point. The distance of the focal point from the center of the
mirror is its focal length . Since this mirror is converging, it has a positive focal length.
Just as for lenses, the shorter the focal length, the more powerful the mirror; thus, for a mirror, too. A more
strongly curved mirror has a shorter focal length and a greater power. Using the law of reflection and some simple
trigonometry, it can be shown that the focal length is half the radius of curvature, or
25.45
where is the radius of curvature of a spherical mirror. The smaller the radius of curvature, the smaller the focal
length and, thus, the more powerful the mirror.
The convex mirror shown inFigure 25.40also has a focal point. Parallel rays of light reflected from the mirror seem
to originate from the point F at the focal distance behind the mirror. The focal length and power of a convex mirror
are negative, since it is a diverging mirror.
PAGE: 1152
1134 25 • Geometric Optics
FIGURE25.40Parallel rays of light reflected from a convex spherical mirror (small in size compared with its radius of curvature) seem to
originate from a well-defined focal point at the focal distance behind the mirror. Convex mirrors diverge light rays and, thus, have a
negative focal length.
Ray tracing is as useful for mirrors as for lenses. The rules for ray tracing for mirrors are based on the illustrations
just discussed:
1. A ray approaching a concave converging mirror parallel to its axis is reflected through the focal point F of the
mirror on the same side. (See rays 1 and 3 inFigure 25.39(b).)
2. A ray approaching a convex diverging mirror parallel to its axis is reflected so that it seems to come from the
focal point F behind the mirror. (See rays 1 and 3 inFigure 25.40.)
3. Any ray striking the center of a mirror is followed by applying the law of reflection; it makes the same angle with
the axis when leaving as when approaching. (See ray 2 inFigure 25.41.)
4. A ray approaching a concave converging mirror through its focal point is reflected parallel to its axis. (The
reverse of rays 1 and 3 inFigure 25.39.)
5. A ray approaching a convex diverging mirror by heading toward its focal point on the opposite side is reflected
parallel to the axis. (The reverse of rays 1 and 3 inFigure 25.40.)
We will use ray tracing to illustrate how images are formed by mirrors, and we can use ray tracing quantitatively to
obtain numerical information. But since we assume each mirror is small compared with its radius of curvature, we
can use the thin lens equations for mirrors just as we did for lenses.
Consider the situation shown inFigure 25.41, concave spherical mirror reflection, in which an object is placed
farther from a concave (converging) mirror than its focal length. That is, is positive and > , so that we may
expect an image similar to the case 1 real image formed by a converging lens. Ray tracing inFigure 25.41shows that
the rays from a common point on the object all cross at a point on the same side of the mirror as the object. Thus a
real image can be projected onto a screen placed at this location. The image distance is positive, and the image is
inverted, so its magnification is negative. This is acase 1 image for mirrors. It differs from the case 1 image for
lenses only in that the image is on the same side of the mirror as the object. It is otherwise identical.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1153
25.7 • Image Formation by Mirrors 1135
FIGURE25.41A case 1 image for a mirror. An object is farther from the converging mirror than its focal length. Rays from a common point
on the object are traced using the rules in the text. Ray 1 approaches parallel to the axis, ray 2 strikes the center of the mirror, and ray 3
goes through the focal point on the way toward the mirror. All three rays cross at the same point after being reflected, locating the inverted
real image. Although three rays are shown, only two of the three are needed to locate the image and determine its height.
EXAMPLE 25.9
A Concave Reflector
Electric room heaters use a concave mirror to reflect infrared (IR) radiation from hot coils. Note that IR follows the
same law of reflection as visible light. Given that the mirror has a radius of curvature of 50.0 cm and produces an
image of the coils 3.00 m away from the mirror, where are the coils?
Strategy and Concept
We are given that the concave mirror projects a real image of the coils at an image distance . The coils
are the object, and we are asked to find their location—that is, to find the object distance . We are also given the
radius of curvature of the mirror, so that its focal length is (positive since the mirror is concave
or converging). Assuming the mirror is small compared with its radius of curvature, we can use the thin lens
equations, to solve this problem.
Solution
Since and are known, thin lens equation can be used to find :
25.46
Rearranging to isolate gives
25.47
Entering known quantities gives a value for :
25.48
This must be inverted to find :
25.49
Discussion
Note that the object (the filament) is farther from the mirror than the mirror’s focal length. This is a case 1 image
( and positive), consistent with the fact that a real image is formed. You will get the most concentrated
thermal energy directly in front of the mirror and 3.00 m away from it. Generally, this is not desirable, since it could
cause burns. Usually, you want the rays to emerge parallel, and this is accomplished by having the filament at the
focal point of the mirror.
PAGE: 1154
1136 25 • Geometric Optics
Note that the filament here is not much farther from the mirror than its focal length and that the image produced is
considerably farther away. This is exactly analogous to a slide projector. Placing a slide only slightly farther away
from the projector lens than its focal length produces an image significantly farther away. As the object gets closer
to the focal distance, the image gets farther away. In fact, as the object distance approaches the focal length, the
image distance approaches infinity and the rays are sent out parallel to one another.
EXAMPLE 25.10
Solar Electric Generating System
One of the solar technologies used today for generating electricity is a device (called a parabolic trough or
concentrating collector) that concentrates the sunlight onto a blackened pipe that contains a fluid. This heated fluid
is pumped to a heat exchanger, where its heat energy is transferred to another system that is used to generate
steam—and so generate electricity through a conventional steam cycle.Figure 25.42shows such a working system
in southern California. Concave mirrors are used to concentrate the sunlight onto the pipe. The mirror has the
approximate shape of a section of a cylinder. For the problem, assume that the mirror is exactly one-quarter of a full
cylinder.
a. If we wish to place the fluid-carrying pipe 40.0 cm from the concave mirror at the mirror’s focal point, what will
be the radius of curvature of the mirror?
b. Per meter of pipe, what will be the amount of sunlight concentrated onto the pipe, assuming the insolation
(incident solar radiation) is ?
c. If the fluid-carrying pipe has a 2.00-cm diameter, what will be the temperature increase of the fluid per meter
of pipe over a period of one minute? Assume all the solar radiation incident on the reflector is absorbed by the
pipe, and that the fluid is mineral oil.
Strategy
To solve anIntegrated Concept Problemwe must first identify the physical principles involved. Part (a) is related to
the current topic. Part (b) involves a little math, primarily geometry. Part (c) requires an understanding of heat and
density.
Solution to (a)
To a good approximation for a concave or semi-spherical surface, the point where the parallel rays from the sun
converge will be at the focal point, so .
Solution to (b)
The insolation is . We must find the cross-sectional area of the concave mirror, since the power
delivered is . The mirror in this case is a quarter-section of a cylinder, so the area for a length of
the mirror is . The area for a length of 1.00 m is then
25.50
The insolation on the 1.00-m length of pipe is then
25.51
Solution to (c)
The increase in temperature is given by . The mass of the mineral oil in the one-meter section of pipe
is
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1155
25.7 • Image Formation by Mirrors 1137
25.52
Therefore, the increase in temperature in one minute is
25.53
Discussion for (c)
An array of such pipes in the California desert can provide a thermal output of 250 MW on a sunny day, with fluids
reaching temperatures as high as . We are considering only one meter of pipe here, and ignoring heat losses
along the pipe.
FIGURE25.42Parabolic trough collectors are used to generate electricity in southern California. (credit: kjkolb, Wikimedia Commons)
What happens if an object is closer to a concave mirror than its focal length? This is analogous to a case 2 image for
lenses ( and positive), which is a magnifier. In fact, this is how makeup mirrors act as magnifiers.Figure
25.43(a) uses ray tracing to locate the image of an object placed close to a concave mirror. Rays from a common
point on the object are reflected in such a manner that they appear to be coming from behind the mirror, meaning
that the image is virtual and cannot be projected. As with a magnifying glass, the image is upright and larger than the
object. This is acase 2 image for mirrorsand is exactly analogous to that for lenses.
PAGE: 1156
1138 25 • Geometric Optics
FIGURE25.43(a) Case 2 images for mirrors are formed when a converging mirror has an object closer to it than its focal length. Ray 1
approaches parallel to the axis, ray 2 strikes the center of the mirror, and ray 3 approaches the mirror as if it came from the focal point. (b) A
magnifying mirror showing the reflection. (credit: Mike Melrose, Flickr)
All three rays appear to originate from the same point after being reflected, locating the upright virtual image behind
the mirror and showing it to be larger than the object. (b) Makeup mirrors are perhaps the most common use of a
concave mirror to produce a larger, upright image.
A convex mirror is a diverging mirror ( is negative) and forms only one type of image. It is acase 3image—one that
is upright and smaller than the object, just as for diverging lenses.Figure 25.44(a) uses ray tracing to illustrate the
location and size of the case 3 image for mirrors. Since the image is behind the mirror, it cannot be projected and is
thus a virtual image. It is also seen to be smaller than the object.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1157
25.7 • Image Formation by Mirrors 1139
FIGURE25.44Case 3 images for mirrors are formed by any convex mirror. Ray 1 approaches parallel to the axis, ray 2 strikes the center of
the mirror, and ray 3 approaches toward the focal point. All three rays appear to originate from the same point after being reflected,
locating the upright virtual image behind the mirror and showing it to be smaller than the object. (b) Security mirrors are convex, producing
a smaller, upright image. Because the image is smaller, a larger area is imaged compared to what would be observed for a flat mirror (and
hence security is improved). (credit: Laura D’Alessandro, Flickr)
EXAMPLE 25.11
Image in a Convex Mirror
A keratometer is a device used to measure the curvature of the cornea, particularly for fitting contact lenses. Light is
reflected from the cornea, which acts like a convex mirror, and the keratometer measures the magnification of the
image. The smaller the magnification, the smaller the radius of curvature of the cornea. If the light source is 12.0 cm
from the cornea and the image’s magnification is 0.0320, what is the cornea’s radius of curvature?
Strategy
If we can find the focal length of the convex mirror formed by the cornea, we can find its radius of curvature (the
radius of curvature is twice the focal length of a spherical mirror). We are given that the object distance is
and that . We first solve for the image distance , and then for .
Solution
. Solving this expression for gives
25.54
Entering known values yields
25.55
PAGE: 1158
1140 25 • Geometric Optics
25.56
Substituting known values,
25.57
This must be inverted to find :
25.58
The radius of curvature is twice the focal length, so that
25.59
Discussion
The radius of curvature found here is reasonable for a cornea. The distance from cornea to retina in an adult eye is
about 2.0 cm. In practice, many corneas are not spherical, complicating the job of fitting contact lenses. Note that
the image distance here is negative, consistent with the fact that the image is behind the mirror, where it cannot be
projected. In this section’s Problems and Exercises, you will show that for a fixed object distance, the smaller the
radius of curvature, the smaller the magnification.
The three types of images formed by mirrors (cases 1, 2, and 3) are exactly analogous to those formed by lenses, as
summarized in the table at the end ofImage Formation by Lenses. It is easiest to concentrate on only three types of
images—then remember that concave mirrors act like convex lenses, whereas convex mirrors act like concave
lenses.
Take-Home Experiment: Concave Mirrors Close to Home
Find a flashlight and identify the curved mirror used in it. Find another flashlight and shine the first flashlight
onto the second one, which is turned off. Estimate the focal length of the mirror. You might try shining a
flashlight on the curved mirror behind the headlight of a car, keeping the headlight switched off, and determine
its focal length.
Problem-Solving Strategy for Mirrors
Step 1. Examine the situation to determine that image formation by a mirror is involved.
Step 2. Refer to theProblem-Solving Strategies for Lenses. The same strategies are valid for mirrors as for lenses
with one qualification—use the ray tracing rules for mirrors listed earlier in this section.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1159
25 • Glossary 1141
Glossary
converging lens a convex lens in which light rays that lens or mirror, the point from which diverging light
enter it parallel to its axis converge at a single point rays appear to originate
on the opposite side geometric optics part of optics dealing with the ray
converging mirror a concave mirror in which light aspect of light
rays that strike it parallel to its axis converge at one index of refraction for a material, the ratio of the
or more points along the axis speed of light in vacuum to that in the material
corner reflector an object consisting of two mutually law of reflection angle of reflection equals the angle
perpendicular reflecting surfaces, so that the light of incidence
that enters is reflected back exactly parallel to the law of reflection angle of reflection equals the angle
direction from which it came of incidence
critical angle incident angle that produces an angle magnification ratio of image height to object height
of refraction of mirror smooth surface that reflects light at specific
dispersion spreading of white light into its full angles, forming an image of the person or object in
spectrum of wavelengths front of it
diverging lens a concave lens in which light rays that power inverse of focal length
enter it parallel to its axis bend away (diverge) from rainbow dispersion of sunlight into a continuous
its axis distribution of colors according to wavelength,
diverging mirror a convex mirror in which light rays produced by the refraction and reflection of sunlight
that strike it parallel to its axis bend away (diverge) by water droplets in the sky
from its axis ray straight line that originates at some point
fiber optics transmission of light down fibers of real image image that can be projected
plastic or glass, applying the principle of total refraction changing of a light ray’s direction when it
internal reflection passes through variations in matter
focal length distance from the center of a lens or virtual image image that cannot be projected
curved mirror to its focal point zircon natural gemstone with a large index of
focal point for a converging lens or mirror, the point refraction
at which converging light rays cross; for a diverging
Section Summary
25.1The Ray Aspect of Light passes through variations in matter is called
refraction.
• A straight line that originates at some point is
• The speed of light in vacuum
called a ray.
• The part of optics dealing with the ray aspect of
• Index of refraction , where is the speed of
light is called geometric optics.
light in the material, is the speed of light in
• Light can travel in three ways from a source to
vacuum, and is the index of refraction.
another location: (1) directly from the source
• Snell’s law, the law of refraction, is stated in
through empty space; (2) through various media;
equation form as .
(3) after being reflected from a mirror.
25.4Total Internal Reflection
25.2The Law of Reflection
• The incident angle that produces an angle of
• The angle of reflection equals the angle of
refraction of is called critical angle.
incidence.
• Total internal reflection is a phenomenon that
• A mirror has a smooth surface and reflects light at
occurs at the boundary between two mediums,
specific angles.
such that if the incident angle in the first medium
• Light is diffused when it reflects from a rough
is greater than the critical angle, then all the light
surface.
is reflected back into that medium.
• Mirror images can be photographed and
• Fiber optics involves the transmission of light
videotaped by instruments.
down fibers of plastic or glass, applying the
25.3The Law of Refraction principle of total internal reflection.
• Endoscopes are used to explore the body through
• The changing of a light ray’s direction when it
PAGE: 1160
1142 25 • Conceptual Questions
various orifices or minor incisions, based on the • A lens that causes the light rays to bend away from
transmission of light through optical fibers. its axis is called a diverging lens.
• Cladding prevents light from being transmitted • Ray tracing is the technique of graphically
between fibers in a bundle. determining the paths that light rays take.
• Diamonds sparkle due to total internal reflection • The image in which light rays from one point on the
coupled with a large index of refraction. object actually cross at the location of the image
and can be projected onto a screen, a piece of film,
25.5Dispersion: The Rainbow and Prisms
or the retina of an eye is called a real image.
• The spreading of white light into its full spectrum • Thin lens equations are and
of wavelengths is called dispersion.
(magnification).
• Rainbows are produced by a combination of
refraction and reflection and involve the dispersion • The distance of the image from the center of the
of sunlight into a continuous distribution of colors. lens is called image distance.
• Dispersion produces beautiful rainbows but also • An image that is on the same side of the lens as
causes problems in certain optical systems. the object and cannot be projected on a screen is
called a virtual image.
25.6Image Formation by Lenses
25.7Image Formation by Mirrors
• Light rays entering a converging lens parallel to its
axis cross one another at a single point on the • The characteristics of an image formed by a flat
opposite side. mirror are: (a) The image and object are the same
• For a converging lens, the focal point is the point at distance from the mirror, (b) The image is a virtual
which converging light rays cross; for a diverging image, and (c) The image is situated behind the
lens, the focal point is the point from which mirror.
diverging light rays appear to originate. • Image length is half the radius of curvature.
• The distance from the center of the lens to its focal
point is called the focal length .
• A convex mirror is a diverging mirror and forms
• Power of a lens is defined to be the inverse of its
only one type of image, namely a virtual image.
focal length, .
Conceptual Questions
25.2The Law of Reflection 6. Explain why an object in water always appears to be
at a depth shallower than it actually is? Why do
1. Using the law of reflection, explain how powder
people sometimes sustain neck and spinal injuries
takes the shine off of a person’s nose. What is the
when diving into unfamiliar ponds or waters?
name of the optical effect?
7. Explain why a person’s legs appear very short when
wading in a pool. Justify your explanation with a ray
25.3The Law of Refraction
diagram showing the path of rays from the feet to
2. Diffusion by reflection from a rough surface is the eye of an observer who is out of the water.
described in this chapter. Light can also be diffused 8. Why is the front surface of a thermometer curved as
by refraction. Describe how this occurs in a specific shown?
situation, such as light interacting with crushed ice.
3. Why is the index of refraction always greater than or
equal to 1?
4. Does the fact that the light flash from lightning
reaches you before its sound prove that the speed
of light is extremely large or simply that it is greater
than the speed of sound? Discuss how you could
use this effect to get an estimate of the speed of
light.
5. Will light change direction toward or away from the
perpendicular when it goes from air to water? Water
to glass? Glass to air? FIGURE25.45The curved surface of the thermometer serves
a purpose.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1161
25 • Conceptual Questions 1143
9. Suppose light were incident from air onto a material 16. When you focus a camera, you adjust the distance
that had a negative index of refraction, say –1.3; of the lens from the film. If the camera lens acts
where does the refracted light ray go? like a thin lens, why can it not be a fixed distance
from the film for both near and distant objects?
25.4Total Internal Reflection 17. A thin lens has two focal points, one on either
side, at equal distances from its center, and
10. A ring with a colorless gemstone is dropped into
should behave the same for light entering from
water. The gemstone becomes invisible when
either side. Look through your eyeglasses (or
submerged. Can it be a diamond? Explain.
those of a friend) backward and forward and
11. A high-quality diamond may be quite clear and
comment on whether they are thin lenses.
colorless, transmitting all visible wavelengths with
18. Will the focal length of a lens change when it is
little absorption. Explain how it can sparkle with
submerged in water? Explain.
flashes of brilliant color when illuminated by white
light.
25.7Image Formation by Mirrors
12. Is it possible that total internal reflection plays a role in
rainbows? Explain in terms of indices of refraction and 19. What are the differences between real and virtual
angles, perhaps referring toFigure 25.46. Some of us images? How can you tell (by looking) whether an
have seen the formation of a double rainbow. Is it image formed by a single lens or mirror is real or
physically possible to observe a triple rainbow? virtual?
20. Can you see a virtual image? Can you photograph
one? Can one be projected onto a screen with
additional lenses or mirrors? Explain your
responses.
21. Is it necessary to project a real image onto a
screen for it to exist?
22. At what distance is an imagealwayslocated—at
, , or ?
23. Under what circumstances will an image be
located at the focal point of a lens or mirror?
24. What is meant by a negative magnification? What
is meant by a magnification that is less than 1 in
magnitude?
FIGURE25.46Double rainbows are not a very common
25. Can a case 1 image be larger than the object even
observance. (credit: InvictusOU812, Flickr)
though its magnification is always negative?
13. The most common type of mirage is an illusion
Explain.
that light from faraway objects is reflected by a
pool of water that is not really there. Mirages are
generally observed in deserts, when there is a hot
layer of air near the ground. Given that the
refractive index of air is lower for air at higher
temperatures, explain how mirages can be
formed.
25.6Image Formation by Lenses
14. It can be argued that a flat piece of glass, such as
in a window, is like a lens with an infinite focal
length. If so, where does it form an image? That is,
how are and related?
15. You can often see a reflection when looking at a
sheet of glass, particularly if it is darker on the
other side. Explain why you can often see a double
image in such circumstances.
PAGE: 1162
1144 25 • Problems & Exercises
26. Figure 25.47shows a light bulb between two 27. Devise an arrangement of mirrors allowing you to
mirrors. One mirror produces a beam of light with see the back of your head. What is the minimum
parallel rays; the other keeps light from escaping number of mirrors needed for this task?
without being put into the beam. Where is the 28. If you wish to see your entire body in a flat mirror
filament of the light in relation to the focal point or (from head to toe), how tall should the mirror be?
radius of curvature of each mirror? Does its size depend upon your distance away
from the mirror? Provide a sketch.
29. It can be argued that a flat mirror has an infinite
focal length. If so, where does it form an image?
That is, how are and related?
30. Why are diverging mirrors often used for rear-view
mirrors in vehicles? What is the main disadvantage
of using such a mirror compared with a flat one?
FIGURE25.47The two mirrors trap most of the bulb’s light
and form a directional beam as in a headlight.
Problems & Exercises
25.1The Ray Aspect of Light 25.2The Law of Reflection
1. Suppose a man stands in front of a mirror as shown 2. Show that when light reflects from two mirrors that
inFigure 25.48. His eyes are 1.65 m above the meet each other at a right angle, the outgoing ray is
floor, and the top of his head is 0.13 m higher. Find parallel to the incoming ray, as illustrated in the
the height above the floor of the top and bottom of following figure.
the smallest mirror in which he can see both the top
of his head and his feet. How is this distance related
to the man’s height?
FIGURE25.49A corner reflector sends the reflected ray back
in a direction parallel to the incident ray, independent of
FIGURE25.48A full-length mirror is one in which you can see incoming direction.
all of yourself. It need not be as big as you, and its size is
3. Light shows staged with lasers use moving mirrors
independent of your distance from it.
to swing beams and create colorful effects. Show
that a light ray reflected from a mirror changes
direction by when the mirror is rotated by an
angle .
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1163
25 • Problems & Exercises 1145
4. A flat mirror is neither converging nor diverging. To 10. A scuba diver training in a pool looks at his
prove this, consider two rays originating from the instructor as shown inFigure 25.51. What angle
same point and diverging at an angle . Show that does the ray from the instructor’s face make with
after striking a plane mirror, the angle between their the perpendicular to the water at the point where
directions remains . the ray enters? The angle between the ray in the
water and the perpendicular to the water is .
FIGURE25.50A flat mirror neither converges nor diverges
light rays. Two rays continue to diverge at the same angle after
reflection.
25.3The Law of Refraction
5. What is the speed of light in water? In glycerine?
FIGURE25.51A scuba diver in a pool and his trainer look at
6. What is the speed of light in air? In crown glass?
each other.
7. Calculate the index of refraction for a medium in
11. Components of some computers communicate
which the speed of light is , and
with each other through optical fibers having an
identify the most likely substance based onTable
index of refraction . What time in
25.1.
nanoseconds is required for a signal to travel
8. In what substance inTable 25.1is the speed of
0.200 m through such a fiber?
light ?
12. (a) Given that the angle between the ray in the
9. There was a major collision of an asteroid with the
water and the perpendicular to the water is ,
Moon in medieval times. It was described by monks
and using information inFigure 25.51, find the
at Canterbury Cathedral in England as a red glow on
height of the instructor’s head above the water,
and around the Moon. How long after the asteroid
noting that you will first have to calculate the
hit the Moon, which is away, would
angle of refraction. (b) Find the apparent depth of
the light first arrive on Earth?
the diver’s head below water as seen by the
instructor. Assume the diver and the diver's image
are the same horizontal distance from the normal.
13. Suppose you have an unknown clear substance
immersed in water, and you wish to identify it by
finding its index of refraction. You arrange to have
a beam of light enter it at an angle of , and
you observe the angle of refraction to be .
What is the index of refraction of the substance
and its likely identity?
PAGE: 1164
1146 25 • Problems & Exercises
14. On the Moon’s surface, lunar astronauts placed a 18. Construct Your Own Problem
corner reflector, off which a laser beam is Consider sunlight entering the Earth’s atmosphere
periodically reflected. The distance to the Moon is at sunrise and sunset—that is, at a incident
calculated from the round-trip time. What percent angle. Taking the boundary between nearly empty
correction is needed to account for the delay in space and the atmosphere to be sudden, calculate
time due to the slowing of light in Earth’s the angle of refraction for sunlight. This lengthens
atmosphere? Assume the distance to the Moon is the time the Sun appears to be above the horizon,
precisely , and Earth’s atmosphere both at sunrise and sunset. Now construct a
(which varies in density with altitude) is equivalent problem in which you determine the angle of
to a layer 30.0 km thick with a constant index of refraction for different models of the atmosphere,
refraction . such as various layers of varying density. Your
15. SupposeFigure 25.52represents a ray of light instructor may wish to guide you on the level of
going from air through crown glass into water, complexity to consider and on how the index of
such as going into a fish tank. Calculate the refraction varies with air density.
amount the ray is displaced by the glass ( ), 19. Unreasonable Results
given that the incident angle is and the glass Light traveling from water to a gemstone strikes
is 1.00 cm thick. the surface at an angle of and has an angle
16. Figure 25.52shows a ray of light passing from one of refraction of . (a) What is the speed of light
medium into a second and then a third. Show that in the gemstone? (b) What is unreasonable about
is the same as it would be if the second this result? (c) Which assumptions are
medium were not present (provided total internal unreasonable or inconsistent?
reflection does not occur).
25.4Total Internal Reflection
20. Verify that the critical angle for light going from
water to air is , as discussed at the end of
Example 25.4, regarding the critical angle for light
traveling in a polystyrene (a type of plastic) pipe
surrounded by air.
21. (a) At the end ofExample 25.4, it was stated that
the critical angle for light going from diamond to
air is . Verify this. (b) What is the critical
angle for light going from zircon to air?
22. An optical fiber uses flint glass clad with crown
glass. What is the critical angle?
23. At what minimum angle will you get total internal
reflection of light traveling in water and reflected
from ice?
FIGURE25.52A ray of light passes from one medium to a 24. Suppose you are using total internal reflection to
third by traveling through a second. The final direction is the
make an efficient corner reflector. If there is air
same as if the second medium were not present, but the ray
is displaced by (shown exaggerated). outside and the incident angle is , what must
be the minimum index of refraction of the material
17. Unreasonable Results
from which the reflector is made?
Suppose light travels from water to another
25. You can determine the index of refraction of a
substance, with an angle of incidence of and
substance by determining its critical angle. (a)
an angle of refraction of . (a) What is the
What is the index of refraction of a substance that
index of refraction of the other substance? (b)
has a critical angle of when submerged in
What is unreasonable about this result? (c) Which
water? What is the substance, based onTable
assumptions are unreasonable or inconsistent?
25.1? (b) What would the critical angle be for this
substance in air?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1165
25 • Problems & Exercises 1147
26. A ray of light, emitted beneath the surface of an 32. A parallel beam of light containing orange (610
unknown liquid with air above it, undergoes total nm) and violet (410 nm) wavelengths goes from
internal reflection as shown inFigure 25.53. What fused quartz to water, striking the surface
is the index of refraction for the liquid and its likely between them at a incident angle. What is
identification? the angle between the two colors in water?
33. A ray of 610 nm light goes from air into fused
quartz at an incident angle of . At what
incident angle must 470 nm light enter flint glass
to have the same angle of refraction?
34. A narrow beam of light containing red (660 nm)
and blue (470 nm) wavelengths travels from air
through a 1.00 cm thick flat piece of crown glass
and back to air again. The beam strikes at a
incident angle. (a) At what angles do the two
colors emerge? (b) By what distance are the red
and blue separated when they emerge?
35. A narrow beam of white light enters a prism made
FIGURE25.53A light ray inside a liquid strikes the surface
of crown glass at a incident angle, as shown
at the critical angle and undergoes total internal reflection.
inFigure 25.55. At what angles, and , do the
27. A light ray entering an optical fiber surrounded by
red (660 nm) and violet (410 nm) components of
air is first refracted and then reflected as shown in
the light emerge from the prism?
Figure 25.54. Show that if the fiber is made from
crown glass, any incident ray will be totally
internally reflected.
FIGURE25.54A light ray enters the end of a fiber, the FIGURE25.55This prism will disperse the white light into a
surface of which is perpendicular to its sides. Examine the rainbow of colors. The incident angle is , and the angles
conditions under which it may be totally internally reflected. at which the red and violet light emerge are and .
25.5Dispersion: The Rainbow and Prisms 25.6Image Formation by Lenses
28. (a) What is the ratio of the speed of red light to 36. What is the power in diopters of a camera lens
violet light in diamond, based onTable 25.2? (b) that has a 50.0 mm focal length?
What is this ratio in polystyrene? (c) Which is more 37. Your camera’s zoom lens has an adjustable focal
dispersive? length ranging from 80.0 to 200 mm. What is its
29. A beam of white light goes from air into water at range of powers?
an incident angle of . At what angles are the 38. What is the focal length of 1.75 D reading glasses
red (660 nm) and violet (410 nm) parts of the light found on the rack in a pharmacy?
refracted? 39. You note that your prescription for new eyeglasses
30. By how much do the critical angles for red (660 is –4.50 D. What will their focal length be?
nm) and violet (410 nm) light differ in a diamond 40. How far from the lens must the film in a camera
surrounded by air? be, if the lens has a 35.0 mm focal length and is
31. (a) A narrow beam of light containing yellow (580 being used to photograph a flower 75.0 cm away?
nm) and green (550 nm) wavelengths goes from Explicitly show how you follow the steps in the
polystyrene to air, striking the surface at a Problem-Solving Strategy for lenses.
incident angle. What is the angle between the
colors when they emerge? (b) How far would they
have to travel to be separated by 1.00 mm?
PAGE: 1166
1148 25 • Problems & Exercises
41. A certain slide projector has a 100 mm focal 50. Suppose a 200 mm focal length telephoto lens is
length lens. (a) How far away is the screen, if a being used to photograph mountains 10.0 km
slide is placed 103 mm from the lens and away. (a) Where is the image? (b) What is the
produces a sharp image? (b) If the slide is 24.0 by height of the image of a 1000 m high cliff on one
36.0 mm, what are the dimensions of the image? of the mountains?
Explicitly show how you follow the steps in the 51. A camera with a 100 mm focal length lens is used
Problem-Solving Strategy for lenses. to photograph the sun and moon. What is the
42. A doctor examines a mole with a 15.0 cm focal height of the image of the sun on the film, given
length magnifying glass held 13.5 cm from the the sun is in diameter and is
mole (a) Where is the image? (b) What is its away?
magnification? (c) How big is the image of a 5.00 52. Combine thin lens equations to show that the
mm diameter mole? magnification for a thin lens is determined by its
43. How far from a piece of paper must you hold your focal length and the object distance and is given
father’s 2.25 D reading glasses to try to burn a by .
hole in the paper with sunlight?
44. A camera with a 50.0 mm focal length lens is 25.7Image Formation by Mirrors
being used to photograph a person standing 3.00
53. What is the focal length of a makeup mirror that
m away. (a) How far from the lens must the film
has a power of 1.50 D?
be? (b) If the film is 36.0 mm high, what fraction of
54. Some telephoto cameras use a mirror rather than
a 1.75 m tall person will fit on it? (c) Discuss how
a lens. What radius of curvature mirror is needed
reasonable this seems, based on your experience
to replace a 800 mm focal length telephoto lens?
in taking or posing for photographs.
55. (a) Calculate the focal length of the mirror formed
45. A camera lens used for taking close-up
by the shiny back of a spoon that has a 3.00 cm
photographs has a focal length of 22.0 mm. The
radius of curvature. (b) What is its power in
farthest it can be placed from the film is 33.0 mm.
diopters?
(a) What is the closest object that can be
56. Find the magnification of the heater element in
photographed? (b) What is the magnification of
Example 25.9. Note that its large magnitude helps
this closest object?
spread out the reflected energy.
46. Suppose your 50.0 mm focal length camera lens is
57. What is the focal length of a makeup mirror that
51.0 mm away from the film in the camera. (a)
produces a magnification of 1.50 when a person’s
How far away is an object that is in focus? (b)
face is 12.0 cm away? Explicitly show how you
What is the height of the object if its image is 2.00
follow the steps in theProblem-Solving Strategy
cm high?
for Mirrors.
47. (a) What is the focal length of a magnifying glass
58. A shopper standing 3.00 m from a convex security
that produces a magnification of 3.00 when held
mirror sees his image with a magnification of
5.00 cm from an object, such as a rare coin? (b)
0.250. (a) Where is his image? (b) What is the
Calculate the power of the magnifier in diopters.
focal length of the mirror? (c) What is its radius of
(c) Discuss how this power compares to those for
curvature? Explicitly show how you follow the
store-bought reading glasses (typically 1.0 to 4.0
steps in theProblem-Solving Strategy for Mirrors.
D). Is the magnifier’s power greater, and should it
59. An object 1.50 cm high is held 3.00 cm from a
be?
person’s cornea, and its reflected image is
48. What magnification will be produced by a lens of
measured to be 0.167 cm high. (a) What is the
power –4.00 D (such as might be used to correct
magnification? (b) Where is the image? (c) Find the
myopia) if an object is held 25.0 cm away?
radius of curvature of the convex mirror formed by
49. InExample 25.7, the magnification of a book held
the cornea. (Note that this technique is used by
7.50 cm from a 10.0 cm focal length lens was
optometrists to measure the curvature of the
found to be 4.00. (a) Find the magnification for the
cornea for contact lens fitting. The instrument
book when it is held 8.50 cm from the magnifier.
used is called a keratometer, or curve measurer.)
(b) Do the same for when it is held 9.50 cm from
the magnifier. (c) Comment on the trend in m as
the object distance increases as in these two
calculations.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1167
25 • Problems & Exercises 1149
60. Ray tracing for a flat mirror shows that the image 64. Consider a 250-W heat lamp fixed to the ceiling in
is located a distance behind the mirror equal to a bathroom. If the filament in one light burns out
the distance of the object from the mirror. This is then the remaining three still work. Construct a
stated , since this is a negative image problem in which you determine the resistance of
distance (it is a virtual image). (a) What is the focal each filament in order to obtain a certain intensity
length of a flat mirror? (b) What is its power? projected on the bathroom floor. The ceiling is 3.0
61. Show that for a flat mirror , knowing that m high. The problem will need to involve concave
the image is a distance behind the mirror equal in mirrors behind the filaments. Your instructor may
magnitude to the distance of the object from the wish to guide you on the level of complexity to
mirror. consider in the electrical components.
62. Use the law of reflection to prove that the focal 65. Critical ThinkingLight composed of multiple
length of a mirror is half its radius of curvature. frequencies passes through crown glass. (a) How
That is, prove that . Note this is true for a much faster does the violet component of the light
spherical mirror only if its diameter is small with a wavelength of 410 nm travel in the crown
compared with its radius of curvature. glass than the component of orange light with a
63. Referring to the electric room heater considered in wavelength of 610 nm? (b) In a mechanical
the first example in this section, calculate the situation with friction, the longer one surface
intensity of IR radiation in projected by the moves relative to the other, the more the friction
concave mirror on a person 3.00 m away. Assume acts, slowing the relative motion during the
that the heating element radiates 1500 W and has process. Is this the same for light in a medium? (c)
an area of , and that half of the radiated In a mechanical situation, it is possible for friction
power is reflected and focused by the mirror. to stop the motion if it occurs over a long enough
path. Is this the same for light in a medium? (d) In
a mechanical friction situation, once the object
slows it will not increase in speed once the friction
no longer acts unless another force is present. If a
light ray exits a medium into a vacuum, will it go
back to a speed ofceven though that would be an
increase in speed not caused by an additional
force?
PAGE: 1168
1150 25 • Problems & Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1169
CHAPTER 26
Vision and Optical Instruments
FIGURE26.1This transmission electron microscope image shows SARS-CoV-2, the coronavirus that causes COVID-19, isolated from a
patient in the U.S. Virus particles are shown emerging from the surface of cells cultured in the lab. The spikes on the outer edge of the virus
particles give coronaviruses their name: crown-like. (credit: NIAID-RML, NIH Image Gallery/Flickr)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
26.1Physics of the Eye
26.2Vision Correction
26.3Color and Color Vision
26.4Microscopes
26.5Telescopes
26.6Aberrations
INTRODUCTION TO VISION AND OPTICAL INSTRUMENTS Explore how the image on the computer screen is
formed. How is the image formation on the computer screen different from the image formation in your eye as you
look down the microscope? How can videos of living cell processes be taken for viewing later on, and by many
different people?
Seeing faces and objects we love and cherish is a delight—one’s favorite teddy bear, a picture on the wall, or the sun
rising over the mountains. Intricate images help us understand nature and are invaluable for developing techniques
and technologies in order to improve the quality of life. The image of a red blood cell that almost fills the cross-
sectional area of a tiny capillary makes us wonder how blood makes it through and not get stuck. We are able to see
bacteria and viruses and understand their structure. It is the knowledge of physics that provides fundamental
understanding and models required to develop new techniques and instruments. Therefore, physics is called an
enabling science—a science that enables development and advancement in other areas. It is through optics and
imaging that physics enables advancement in major areas of biosciences. This chapter illustrates the enabling
nature of physics through an understanding of how a human eye is able to see, how we are able to use optical
PAGE: 1170
1152 26 • Vision and Optical Instruments
instruments to see beyond what is possible with the naked eye, and how we develop methods of vision correction. It
is convenient to categorize these instruments on the basis of geometric optics (seeGeometric Optics) and wave
optics (seeWave Optics).
26.1 Physics of the Eye
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the image formation by the eye.
• Explain why peripheral images lack detail and color.
• Define refractive indices.
• Analyze the accommodation of the eye for distant and near vision.
Early thinkers had a wide array of theories regarding vision. Euclid and Ptolemy believed that the eyes emitted rays
of light; others promoted the idea that objects gave off some particle or substance that was discerned by the eye.
Ibn al-Haytham (sometimes called Alhazen), who was mentioned earlier as an originator of the scientific method,
conducted a number of experiments to illustrate how the anatomical construction of the eye led to its ability to form
images. He recognized that light reflected from objects entered the eye through the lens and was passed to the
optic nerve. Al-Haytham did not fully understand the mechanisms involved, but many subsequent discoveries in
vision, reflection, and magnification built on his discoveries and methods.
The eye is perhaps the most interesting of all optical instruments. The eye is remarkable in how it forms images and
in the richness of detail and color it can detect. However, our eyes commonly need some correction, to reach what is
called “normal” vision, but should be called ideal rather than normal. Image formation by our eyes and common
vision correction are easy to analyze with the optics discussed inGeometric Optics.
Figure 26.2shows the basic anatomy of the eye. The cornea and lens form a system that, to a good approximation,
acts as a single thin lens. For clear vision, a real image must be projected onto the light-sensitive retina, which lies at
a fixed distance from the lens. The lens of the eye adjusts its power to produce an image on the retina for objects at
different distances. The center of the image falls on the fovea, which has the greatest density of light receptors and
the greatest acuity (sharpness) in the visual field. The variable opening (or pupil) of the eye along with chemical
adaptation allows the eye to detect light intensities from the lowest observable to times greater (without
damage). This is an incredible range of detection. Our eyes perform a vast number of functions, such as sense
direction, movement, sophisticated colors, and distance. Processing of visual nerve impulses begins with
interconnections in the retina and continues in the brain. The optic nerve conveys signals received by the eye to the
brain.
FIGURE26.2The cornea and lens of an eye act together to form a real image on the light-sensing retina, which has its densest
concentration of receptors in the fovea and a blind spot over the optic nerve. The power of the lens of an eye is adjustable to provide an
image on the retina for varying object distances. Layers of tissues with varying indices of refraction in the lens are shown here. However,
they have been omitted from other pictures for clarity.
Refractive indices are crucial to image formation using lenses.Table 26.1shows refractive indices relevant to the
eye. The biggest change in the refractive index, and bending of rays, occurs at the cornea rather than the lens. The
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1171
26.1 • Physics of the Eye 1153
ray diagram inFigure 26.3shows image formation by the cornea and lens of the eye. The rays bend according to the
refractive indices provided inTable 26.1. The cornea provides about two-thirds of the power of the eye, owing to the
fact that speed of light changes considerably while traveling from air into cornea. The lens provides the remaining
power needed to produce an image on the retina. The cornea and lens can be treated as a single thin lens, even
though the light rays pass through several layers of material (such as cornea, aqueous humor, several layers in the
lens, and vitreous humor), changing direction at each interface. The image formed is much like the one produced by
a single convex lens. This is a case 1 image. Images formed in the eye are inverted but the brain inverts them once
more to make them seem upright.
Material Index of Refraction
Water 1.33
Air 1.0
Cornea 1.38
Aqueous humor 1.34
Lens 1.41 average (varies throughout the lens, greatest in center)
Vitreous humor 1.34
TABLE26.1Refractive Indices Relevant to the Eye
FIGURE26.3An image is formed on the retina with light rays converging most at the cornea and upon entering and exiting the lens. Rays
from the top and bottom of the object are traced and produce an inverted real image on the retina. The distance to the object is drawn
smaller than scale.
As noted, the image must fall precisely on the retina to produce clear vision — that is, the image distance must
equal the lens-to-retina distance. Because the lens-to-retina distance does not change, the image distance must
be the same for objects at all distances. The eye manages this by varying the power (and focal length) of the lens to
accommodate for objects at various distances. The process of adjusting the eye’s focal length is called
accommodation. A person with normal (ideal) vision can see objects clearly at distances ranging from 25 cm to
essentially infinity. However, although the near point (the shortest distance at which a sharp focus can be obtained)
increases with age (becoming meters for some older people), we will consider it to be 25 cm in our treatment here.
Figure 26.4shows the accommodation of the eye for distant and near vision. Since light rays from a nearby object
can diverge and still enter the eye, the lens must be more converging (more powerful) for close vision than for
distant vision. To be more converging, the lens is made thicker by the action of the ciliary muscle surrounding it. The
eye is most relaxed when viewing distant objects, one reason that microscopes and telescopes are designed to
produce distant images. Vision of very distant objects is calledtotally relaxed, while close vision is termed
accommodated, with the closest vision beingfully accommodated.
PAGE: 1172
1154 26 • Vision and Optical Instruments
FIGURE26.4Relaxed and accommodated vision for distant and close objects. (a) Light rays from the same point on a distant object must
be nearly parallel while entering the eye and more easily converge to produce an image on the retina. (b) Light rays from a nearby object
can diverge more and still enter the eye. A more powerful lens is needed to converge them on the retina than if they were parallel.
We will use the thin lens equations to examine image formation by the eye quantitatively. First, note the power of a
lens is given as , so we rewrite the thin lens equations as
26.1
and
26.2
We understand that must equal the lens-to-retina distance to obtain clear vision, and that normal vision is
possible for objects at distances to infinity.
Take-Home Experiment: The Pupil
Look at the central transparent area of someone’s eye, the pupil, in normal room light. Estimate the diameter of
the pupil. Now turn off the lights and darken the room. After a few minutes turn on the lights and promptly
estimate the diameter of the pupil. What happens to the pupil as the eye adjusts to the room light? Explain your
observations.
The eye can detect an impressive amount of detail, considering how small the image is on the retina. To get some
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1173
26.1 • Physics of the Eye 1155
idea of how small the image can be, consider the following example.
EXAMPLE 26.1
Size of Image on Retina
What is the size of the image on the retina of a cm diameter human hair, held at arm’s length (60.0 cm)
away? Take the lens-to-retina distance to be 2.00 cm.
Strategy
We want to find the height of the image , given the height of the object is cm. We also know
that the object is 60.0 cm away, so that . For clear vision, the image distance must equal the lens-to-
retina distance, and so . The equation can be used to find with the known
information.
Solution
The only unknown variable in the equation is :
26.3
Rearranging to isolate yields
26.4
Substituting the known values gives
26.5
Discussion
This truly small image is not the smallest discernible—that is, the limit to visual acuity is even smaller than this.
Limitations on visual acuity have to do with the wave properties of light and will be discussed in the next chapter.
Some limitation is also due to the inherent anatomy of the eye and processing that occurs in our brain.
EXAMPLE 26.2
Power Range of the Eye
Calculate the power of the eye when viewing objects at the greatest and smallest distances possible with normal
vision, assuming a lens-to-retina distance of 2.00 cm (a typical value).
Strategy
For clear vision, the image must be on the retina, and so here. For distant vision, , and for
close vision, , as discussed earlier. The equation as written just above, can be used
directly to solve for in both cases, since we know and . Power has units of diopters, where , and
so we should express all distances in meters.
Solution
For distant vision,
26.6
PAGE: 1174
1156 26 • Vision and Optical Instruments
Since , this gives
26.7
Now, for close vision,
26.8
Discussion
For an eye with this typical 2.00 cm lens-to-retina distance, the power of the eye ranges from 50.0 D (for distant
totally relaxed vision) to 54.0 D (for close fully accommodated vision), which is an 8% increase. This increase in
power for close vision is consistent with the preceding discussion and the ray tracing inFigure 26.4. An 8% ability to
accommodate is considered normal but is typical for people who are about 40 years old. Younger people have
greater accommodation ability, whereas older people gradually lose the ability to accommodate. When an
optometrist identifies accommodation as a problem in elder people, it is most likely due to stiffening of the lens. The
lens of the eye changes with age in ways that tend to preserve the ability to see distant objects clearly but do not
allow the eye to accommodate for close vision, a condition calledpresbyopia(literally, elder eye). To correct this
vision defect, we place a converging, positive power lens in front of the eye, such as found in reading glasses.
Commonly available reading glasses are rated by their power in diopters, typically ranging from 1.0 to 3.5 D.
26.2 Vision Correction
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Identify and discuss common vision defects.
• Explain nearsightedness and farsightedness corrections.
• Explain laser vision correction.
The need for some type of vision correction is very common. Common vision defects are easy to understand, and
some are simple to correct.Figure 26.5illustrates two common vision defects.Nearsightedness, ormyopia, is the
inability to see distant objects clearly while close objects are clear. The eye overconverges the nearly parallel rays
from a distant object, and the rays cross in front of the retina. More divergent rays from a close object are converged
on the retina for a clear image. The distance to the farthest object that can be seen clearly is called thefar pointof
the eye (normally infinity).Farsightedness, orhyperopia, is the inability to see close objects clearly while distant
objects may be clear. A farsighted eye does not converge sufficient rays from a close object to make the rays meet
on the retina. Less diverging rays from a distant object can be converged for a clear image. The distance to the
closest object that can be seen clearly is called thenear pointof the eye (normally 25 cm).
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1175
26.2 • Vision Correction 1157
FIGURE26.5(a) The nearsighted (myopic) eye converges rays from a distant object in front of the retina; thus, they are diverging when they
strike the retina, producing a blurry image. This can be caused by the lens of the eye being too powerful or the length of the eye being too
great. (b) The farsighted (hyperopic) eye is unable to converge the rays from a close object by the time they strike the retina, producing
blurry close vision. This can be caused by insufficient power in the lens or by the eye being too short.
Since the nearsighted eye over converges light rays, the correction for nearsightedness is to place a diverging
spectacle lens in front of the eye. This reduces the power of an eye that is too powerful. Another way of thinking
about this is that a diverging spectacle lens produces a case 3 image, which is closer to the eye than the object (see
Figure 26.6). To determine the spectacle power needed for correction, you must know the person’s far point—that is,
you must know the greatest distance at which the person can see clearly. Then the image produced by a spectacle
lens must be at this distance or closer for the nearsighted person to be able to see it clearly. It is worth noting that
wearing glasses does not change the eye in any way. The eyeglass lens is simply used to create an image of the
object at a distance where the nearsighted person can see it clearly. Whereas someone not wearing glasses can see
clearlyobjectsthat fall between their near point and their far point, someone wearing glasses can seeimagesthat
fall between their near point and their far point.
FIGURE26.6Correction of nearsightedness requires a diverging lens that compensates for the overconvergence by the eye. The diverging
lens produces an image closer to the eye than the object, so that the nearsighted person can see it clearly.
PAGE: 1176
1158 26 • Vision and Optical Instruments
EXAMPLE 26.3
Correcting Nearsightedness
What power of spectacle lens is needed to correct the vision of a nearsighted person whose far point is 30.0 cm?
Assume the spectacle (corrective) lens is held 1.50 cm away from the eye by eyeglass frames.
Strategy
You want this nearsighted person to be able to see very distant objects clearly. That means the spectacle lens must
produce an image 30.0 cm from the eye for an object very far away. An image 30.0 cm from the eye will be 28.5 cm
to the left of the spectacle lens (seeFigure 26.6). Therefore, we must get when . The image
distance is negative, because it is on the same side of the spectacle as the object.
Solution
Since and are known, the power of the spectacle lens can be found using as written earlier:
26.9
Since , we obtain:
26.10
Discussion
The negative power indicates a diverging (or concave) lens, as expected. The spectacle produces a case 3 image
closer to the eye, where the person can see it. If you examine eyeglasses for nearsighted people, you will find the
lenses are thinnest in the center. Additionally, if you examine a prescription for eyeglasses for nearsighted people,
you will find that the prescribed power is negative and given in units of diopters.
Since the farsighted eye under converges light rays, the correction for farsightedness is to place a converging
spectacle lens in front of the eye. This increases the power of an eye that is too weak. Another way of thinking about
this is that a converging spectacle lens produces a case 2 image, which is farther from the eye than the object (see
Figure 26.7). To determine the spectacle power needed for correction, you must know the person’s near point—that
is, you must know the smallest distance at which the person can see clearly. Then the image produced by a
spectacle lens must be at this distance or farther for the farsighted person to be able to see it clearly.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1177
26.2 • Vision Correction 1159
FIGURE26.7Correction of farsightedness uses a converging lens that compensates for the under convergence by the eye. The converging
lens produces an image farther from the eye than the object, so that the farsighted person can see it clearly.
EXAMPLE 26.4
Correcting Farsightedness
What power of spectacle lens is needed to allow a farsighted person, whose near point is 1.00 m, to see an object
clearly that is 25.0 cm away? Assume the spectacle (corrective) lens is held 1.50 cm away from the eye by eyeglass
frames.
Strategy
When an object is held 25.0 cm from the person’s eyes, the spectacle lens must produce an image 1.00 m away (the
near point). An image 1.00 m from the eye will be 98.5 cm to the left of the spectacle lens because the spectacle
lens is 1.50 cm from the eye (seeFigure 26.7). Therefore, . The image distance is negative, because
it is on the same side of the spectacle as the object. The object is 23.5 cm to the left of the spectacle, so that
.
Solution
Since and are known, the power of the spectacle lens can be found using :
26.11
Discussion
The positive power indicates a converging (convex) lens, as expected. The convex spectacle produces a case 2
image farther from the eye, where the person can see it. If you examine eyeglasses of farsighted people, you will
find the lenses to be thickest in the center. In addition, a prescription of eyeglasses for farsighted people has a
prescribed power that is positive.
Another common vision defect isastigmatism, an unevenness or asymmetry in the focus of the eye. For example,
rays passing through a vertical region of the eye may focus closer than rays passing through a horizontal region,
resulting in the image appearing elongated. This is mostly due to irregularities in the shape of the cornea but can
PAGE: 1178
1160 26 • Vision and Optical Instruments
also be due to lens irregularities or unevenness in the retina. Because of these irregularities, different parts of the
lens system produce images at different locations. The eye-brain system can compensate for some of these
irregularities, but they generally manifest themselves as less distinct vision or sharper images along certain axes.
Figure 26.8shows a chart used to detect astigmatism. Astigmatism can be at least partially corrected with a
spectacle having the opposite irregularity of the eye. If an eyeglass prescription has a cylindrical correction, it is
there to correct astigmatism. The normal corrections for short- or farsightedness are spherical corrections, uniform
along all axes.
FIGURE26.8This chart can detect astigmatism, unevenness in the focus of the eye. Check each of your eyes separately by looking at the
center cross (without spectacles if you wear them). If lines along some axes appear darker or clearer than others, you have an astigmatism.
Contact lenses have advantages over glasses beyond their cosmetic aspects. One problem with glasses is that as
the eye moves, it is not at a fixed distance from the spectacle lens. Contacts rest on and move with the eye,
eliminating this problem. Because contacts cover a significant portion of the cornea, they provide superior
peripheral vision compared with eyeglasses. Contacts also correct some corneal astigmatism caused by surface
irregularities. The tear layer between the smooth contact and the cornea fills in the irregularities. Since the index of
refraction of the tear layer and the cornea are very similar, you now have a regular optical surface in place of an
irregular one. If the curvature of a contact lens is not the same as the cornea (as may be necessary with some
individuals to obtain a comfortable fit), the tear layer between the contact and cornea acts as a lens. If the tear layer
is thinner in the center than at the edges, it has a negative power, for example. Skilled optometrists will adjust the
power of the contact to compensate.
Other advances in vision correction demonstrate the interconnectedness and value of scientific research. In the
1980s, Donna Strickland and Gérard Mourou worked on ways to make small but powerful lasers. Up until that time,
powerful lasers had to be quite large in order to function properly. Essentially, the intensity of the beam itself would
modify the instrument’s ability to function and create too much heat to be practical. Strickland and Mourou used
ultrashort laser pulses passed over a grating that modified the beam but retained its power. Chirped pulse
amplification, as it became known, has been used to develop most of the highest-powered lasers in the world, but
also some of the smallest and most common. Decades after their initial discovery, Strickland and Mourou were
awarded the Nobel Prize for Physics (with Strickland becoming the third woman to receive the award) partly due to
CPA’s pivotal role in the increasingly common practice of laser vision correction—an application neither planned
during their initial research.
Laser vision correctionhas progressed rapidly in the last few years. It is the latest and by far the most successful in
a series of procedures that correct vision by reshaping the cornea. As noted at the beginning of this section, the
cornea accounts for about two-thirds of the power of the eye. Thus, small adjustments of its curvature have the
same effect as putting a lens in front of the eye. To a reasonable approximation, the power of multiple lenses placed
close together equals the sum of their powers. For example, a concave spectacle lens (for nearsightedness) having
has the same effect on vision as reducing the power of the eye itself by 3.00 D. So to correct the eye
for nearsightedness, the cornea is flattened to reduce its power. Similarly, to correct for farsightedness, the
curvature of the cornea is enhanced to increase the power of the eye—the same effect as the positive power
spectacle lens used for farsightedness. Laser vision correction uses high intensity electromagnetic radiation to
ablate (to remove material from the surface) and reshape the corneal surfaces.
Today, the most commonly used laser vision correction procedure isLaser in situ Keratomileusis (LASIK). The top
layer of the cornea is surgically peeled back and the underlying tissue ablated by multiple bursts of finely controlled
ultraviolet radiation produced by an excimer laser. Lasers are used because they not only produce well-focused
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1179
26.3 • Color and Color Vision 1161
intense light, but they also emit very pure wavelength electromagnetic radiation that can be controlled more
accurately than mixed wavelength light. The 193 nm wavelength UV commonly used is extremely and strongly
absorbed by corneal tissue, allowing precise evaporation of very thin layers. A computer controlled program applies
more bursts, usually at a rate of 10 per second, to the areas that require deeper removal. Typically a spot less than 1
mm in diameter and about in thickness is removed by each burst. Nearsightedness, farsightedness, and
astigmatism can be corrected with an accuracy that produces normal distant vision in more than 90% of the
patients, in many cases right away. The corneal flap is replaced; healing takes place rapidly and is nearly painless.
More than 1 million Americans per year undergo LASIK (seeFigure 26.9).
FIGURE26.9Laser vision correction is being performed using the LASIK procedure. Reshaping of the cornea by laser ablation is based on a
careful assessment of the patient’s vision and is computer controlled. The upper corneal layer is temporarily peeled back and minimally
disturbed in LASIK, providing for more rapid and less painful healing of the less sensitive tissues below. (credit: U.S. Navy photo by Mass
Communication Specialist 1st Class Brien Aho)
26.3 Color and Color Vision
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the simple theory of color vision.
• Outline the coloring properties of light sources.
• Describe the retinex theory of color vision.
The gift of vision is made richer by the existence of color. Objects and lights abound with thousands of hues that
stimulate our eyes, brains, and emotions. Two basic questions are addressed in this brief treatment—what does
color mean in scientific terms, and how do we, as humans, perceive it?
Simple Theory of Color Vision
We have already noted that color is associated with the wavelength of visible electromagnetic radiation. When our
eyes receive pure-wavelength light, we tend to see only a few colors. Six of these (most often listed) are red, orange,
yellow, green, blue, and violet. These are the rainbow of colors produced when white light is dispersed according to
different wavelengths. There are thousands of otherhuesthat we can perceive. These include brown, teal, gold,
pink, and white. One simple theory of color vision implies that all these hues are our eye’s response to different
combinations of wavelengths. This is true to an extent, but we find that color perception is even subtler than our
eye’s response for various wavelengths of light.
The two major types of light-sensing cells (photoreceptors) in the retina arerods and cones. Rods are more
sensitive than cones by a factor of about 1000 and are solely responsible for peripheral vision as well as vision in
very dark environments. They are also important for motion detection. There are about 120 million rods in the
human retina. Rods do not yield color information. You may notice that you lose color vision when it is very dark, but
you retain the ability to discern grey scales.
PAGE: 1180
1162 26 • Vision and Optical Instruments
FIGURE26.10(a) All photoreceptors have inner segments containing the nucleus and other important organelles and outer segments with
membrane arrays containing the photosensitive opsin molecules. Rod outer segments are long columnar shapes with stacks of membrane-
bound discs that contain the rhodopsin pigment. Cone outer segments are short, tapered shapes with folds of membrane in place of the
discs in the rods. (b) Tissue of the retina shows a dense layer of nuclei of the rods and cones. LM × 800. (Micrograph provided by the
Regents of University of Michigan Medical School © 2012)
Take-Home Experiment: Rods and Cones
1. Go into a darkened room from a brightly lit room, or from outside in the Sun. How long did it take to start
seeing shapes more clearly? What about color? Return to the bright room. Did it take a few minutes before
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1181
26.3 • Color and Color Vision 1163
you could see things clearly?
2. Demonstrate the sensitivity of foveal vision. Look at the letter G in the word ROGERS. What about the clarity
of the letters on either side of G?
Cones are most concentrated in the fovea, the central region of the retina. There are no rods here. The fovea is at the
center of the macula, a 5 mm diameter region responsible for our central vision. The cones work best in bright light
and are responsible for high resolution vision. There are about 6 million cones in the human retina. There are three
types of cones, and each type is sensitive to different ranges of wavelengths, as illustrated inFigure 26.11. A
simplified theory of color visionis that there are threeprimary colorscorresponding to the three types of cones.
The thousands of other hues that we can distinguish among are created by various combinations of stimulations of
the three types of cones. Color television uses a three-color system in which the screen is covered with equal
numbers of red, green, and blue phosphor dots. The broad range of hues a viewer sees is produced by various
combinations of these three colors. For example, you will perceive yellow when red and green are illuminated with
the correct ratio of intensities. White may be sensed when all three are illuminated. Then, it would seem that all
hues can be produced by adding three primary colors in various proportions. But there is an indication that color
vision is more sophisticated. There is no unique set of three primary colors. Another set that works is yellow, green,
and blue. A further indication of the need for a more complex theory of color vision is that various different
combinations can produce the same hue. Yellow can be sensed with yellow light, or with a combination of red and
green, and also with white light from which violet has been removed. The three-primary-colors aspect of color vision
is well established; more sophisticated theories expand on it rather than deny it.
FIGURE26.11The image shows the relative sensitivity of the three types of cones, which are named according to wavelengths of greatest
sensitivity. Rods are about 1000 times more sensitive, and their curve peaks at about 500 nm. Evidence for the three types of cones comes
from direct measurements in animal and human eyes and testing of people with color blindness.
Consider why various objects display color—that is, why are feathers blue and red in a crimson rosella? Thetrue
color of an objectis defined by its absorptive or reflective characteristics.Figure 26.12shows white light falling on
three different objects, one pure blue, one pure red, and one black, as well as pure red light falling on a white object.
Other hues are created by more complex absorption characteristics. Pink, for example on a galah cockatoo, can be
due to weak absorption of all colors except red. An object can appear a different color under non-white illumination.
For example, a pure blue object illuminated with pure red light willappearblack, because it absorbs all the red light
falling on it. But, the true color of the object is blue, which is independent of illumination.
FIGURE26.12Absorption characteristics determine the true color of an object. Here, three objects are illuminated by white light, and one
by pure red light. White is the equal mixture of all visible wavelengths; black is the absence of light.
PAGE: 1182
1164 26 • Vision and Optical Instruments
Similarly,light sources have colorsthat are defined by the wavelengths they produce. A helium-neon laser emits
pure red light. In fact, the phrase “pure red light” is defined by having a sharp constrained spectrum, a characteristic
of laser light. The Sun produces a broad yellowish spectrum, fluorescent lights emit bluish-white light, and
incandescent lights emit reddish-white hues as seen inFigure 26.13. As you would expect, you sense these colors
when viewing the light source directly or when illuminating a white object with them. All of this fits neatly into the
simplified theory that a combination of wavelengths produces various hues.
Take-Home Experiment: Exploring Color Addition
This activity is best done with plastic sheets of different colors as they allow more light to pass through to our
eyes. However, thin sheets of paper and fabric can also be used. Overlay different colors of the material and hold
them up to a white light. Using the theory described above, explain the colors you observe. You could also try
mixing different crayon colors.
FIGURE26.13Emission spectra for various light sources are shown. Curve A is average sunlight at Earth’s surface, curve B is light from a
fluorescent lamp, and curve C is the output of an incandescent light. The spike for a helium-neon laser (curve D) is due to its pure
wavelength emission. The spikes in the fluorescent output are due to atomic spectra—a topic that will be explored later.
Color Constancy and a Modified Theory of Color Vision
The eye-brain color-sensing system can, by comparing various objects in its view, perceive the true color of an
object under varying lighting conditions—an ability that is calledcolor constancy. We can sense that a white
tablecloth, for example, is white whether it is illuminated by sunlight, fluorescent light, or candlelight. The
wavelengths entering the eye are quite different in each case, as the graphs inFigure 26.13imply, but our color
vision can detect the true color by comparing the tablecloth with its surroundings.
Theories that take color constancy into account are based on a large body of anatomical evidence as well as
perceptual studies. There are nerve connections among the light receptors on the retina, and there are far fewer
nerve connections to the brain than there are rods and cones. This means that there is signal processing in the eye
before information is sent to the brain. For example, the eye makes comparisons between adjacent light receptors
and is very sensitive to edges as seen inFigure 26.14. Rather than responding simply to the light entering the eye,
which is uniform in the various rectangles in this figure, the eye responds to the edges and senses false darkness
variations.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1183
26.4 • Microscopes 1165
FIGURE26.14The importance of edges is shown. Although the grey strips are uniformly shaded, as indicated by the graph immediately
below them, they do not appear uniform at all. Instead, they are perceived darker on the dark side and lighter on the light side of the edge,
as shown in the bottom graph. This is due to nerve impulse processing in the eye.
One theory that takes various factors into account was advanced by Edwin Land (1909 – 1991), the creative founder
of the Polaroid Corporation. Land proposed, based partly on his many elegant experiments, that the three types of
cones are organized into systems calledretinexes. Each retinex forms an image that is compared with the others,
and the eye-brain system thus can compare a candle-illuminated white table cloth with its generally reddish
surroundings and determine that it is actually white. Thisretinex theory of color visionis an example of modified
theories of color vision that attempt to account for its subtleties. One striking experiment performed by Land
demonstrates that some type of image comparison may produce color vision. Two pictures are taken of a scene on
black-and-white film, one using a red filter, the other a blue filter. Resulting black-and-white slides are then
projected and superimposed on a screen, producing a black-and-white image, as expected. Then a red filter is
placed in front of the slide taken with a red filter, and the images are again superimposed on a screen. You would
expect an image in various shades of pink, but instead, the image appears to humans in full color with all the hues of
the original scene. This implies that color vision can be induced by comparison of the black-and-white and red
images. Color vision is not completely understood or explained, and the retinex theory is not totally accepted. It is
apparent that color vision is much subtler than what a first look might imply.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Color Vision
Make a whole rainbow by mixing red, green, and blue light. Change the wavelength of a monochromatic beam or
filter white light. View the light as a solid beam, or see the individual photons.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/26-3-color-and-color-vision)
26.4 Microscopes
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Investigate different types of microscopes.
• Learn how image is formed in a compound microscope.
Although the eye is marvelous in its ability to see objects large and small, it obviously has limitations to the smallest
details it can detect. Human desire to see beyond what is possible with the naked eye led to the use of optical
instruments. In this section we will examine microscopes, instruments for enlarging the detail that we cannot see
with the unaided eye. The microscope is a multiple-element system having more than a single lens or mirror. (See
PAGE: 1184
1166 26 • Vision and Optical Instruments
Figure 26.15) A microscope can be made from two convex lenses. The image formed by the first element becomes
the object for the second element. The second element forms its own image, which is the object for the third
element, and so on. Ray tracing helps to visualize the image formed. If the device is composed of thin lenses and
mirrors that obey the thin lens equations, then it is not difficult to describe their behavior numerically.
FIGURE26.15Multiple lenses and mirrors are used in this microscope. (credit: U.S. Navy photo by Tom Watanabe)
Microscopes were first developed in the early 1600s by eyeglass makers in The Netherlands and Denmark. The
simplestcompound microscopeis constructed from two convex lenses as shown schematically inFigure 26.16.
The first lens is called theobjective lens, and has typical magnification values from to . In standard
microscopes, the objectives are mounted such that when you switch between objectives, the sample remains in
focus. Objectives arranged in this way are described as parfocal. The second, theeyepiece, also referred to as the
ocular, has several lenses which slide inside a cylindrical barrel. The focusing ability is provided by the movement of
both the objective lens and the eyepiece. The purpose of a microscope is to magnify small objects, and both lenses
contribute to the final magnification. Additionally, the final enlarged image is produced in a location far enough from
the observer to be easily viewed, since the eye cannot focus on objects or images that are too close.
FIGURE26.16A compound microscope composed of two lenses, an objective and an eyepiece. The objective forms a case 1 image that is
larger than the object. This first image is the object for the eyepiece. The eyepiece forms a case 2 final image that is further magnified.
To see how the microscope inFigure 26.16forms an image, we consider its two lenses in succession. The object is
slightly farther away from the objective lens than its focal length , producing a case 1 image that is larger than the
object. This first image is the object for the second lens, or eyepiece. The eyepiece is intentionally located so it can
further magnify the image. The eyepiece is placed so that the first image is closer to it than its focal length . Thus
the eyepiece acts as a magnifying glass, and the final image is made even larger. The final image remains inverted,
but it is farther from the observer, making it easy to view (the eye is most relaxed when viewing distant objects and
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1185
26.4 • Microscopes 1167
normally cannot focus closer than 25 cm). Since each lens produces a magnification that multiplies the height of the
image, it is apparent that the overall magnification is the product of the individual magnifications:
26.12
where is the magnification of the objective and is the magnification of the eyepiece. This equation can be
generalized for any combination of thin lenses and mirrors that obey the thin lens equations.
Overall Magnification
The overall magnification of a multiple-element system is the product of the individual magnifications of its
elements.
EXAMPLE 26.5
Microscope Magnification
Calculate the magnification of an object placed 6.20 mm from a compound microscope that has a 6.00 mm focal
length objective and a 50.0 mm focal length eyepiece. The objective and eyepiece are separated by 23.0 cm.
Strategy and Concept
This situation is similar to that shown inFigure 26.16. To find the overall magnification, we must find the
magnification of the objective, then the magnification of the eyepiece. This involves using the thin lens equation.
Solution
The magnification of the objective lens is given as
26.13
where and are the object and image distances, respectively, for the objective lens as labeled inFigure 26.16.
The object distance is given to be , but the image distance is not known. Isolating , we have
26.14
where is the focal length of the objective lens. Substituting known values gives
26.15
We invert this to find :
26.16
Substituting this into the expression for gives
26.17
Now we must find the magnification of the eyepiece, which is given by
26.18
where and are the image and object distances for the eyepiece (seeFigure 26.16). The object distance is the
distance of the first image from the eyepiece. Since the first image is 186 mm to the right of the objective and the
eyepiece is 230 mm to the right of the objective, the object distance is . This
places the first image closer to the eyepiece than its focal length, so that the eyepiece will form a case 2 image as
shown in the figure. We still need to find the location of the final image in order to find the magnification. This is
PAGE: 1186
1168 26 • Vision and Optical Instruments
done as before to obtain a value for :
26.19
Inverting gives
26.20
The eyepiece’s magnification is thus
26.21
So the overall magnification is
26.22
Discussion
Both the objective and the eyepiece contribute to the overall magnification, which is large and negative, consistent
withFigure 26.16, where the image is seen to be large and inverted. In this case, the image is virtual and inverted,
which cannot happen for a single element (case 2 and case 3 images for single elements are virtual and upright).
The final image is 367 mm (0.367 m) to the left of the eyepiece. Had the eyepiece been placed farther from the
objective, it could have formed a case 1 image to the right. Such an image could be projected on a screen, but it
would be behind the head of the person in the figure and not appropriate for direct viewing. The procedure used to
solve this example is applicable in any multiple-element system. Each element is treated in turn, with each forming
an image that becomes the object for the next element. The process is not more difficult than for single lenses or
mirrors, only lengthier.
Normal optical microscopes can magnify up to with a theoretical resolution of . The lenses can be
quite complicated and are composed of multiple elements to reduce aberrations. Microscope objective lenses are
particularly important as they primarily gather light from the specimen. Three parameters describe microscope
objectives: thenumerical aperture , the magnification , and the working distance. The is related to
the light gathering ability of a lens and is obtained using the angle of acceptance formed by the maximum cone of
rays focusing on the specimen (seeFigure 26.17(a)) and is given by
26.23
where is the refractive index of the medium between the lens and the specimen and . As the angle of
acceptance given by increases, becomes larger and more light is gathered from a smaller focal region giving
higher resolution. A objective gives more detail than a objective.
FIGURE26.17(a) The numerical aperture of a microscope objective lens refers to the light-gathering ability of the lens and is
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1187
26.4 • Microscopes 1169
calculated using half the angle of acceptance . (b) Here, is half the acceptance angle for light rays from a specimen entering a camera
lens, and is the diameter of the aperture that controls the light entering the lens.
While the numerical aperture can be used to compare resolutions of various objectives, it does not indicate how far
the lens could be from the specimen. This is specified by the “working distance,” which is the distance (in mm
usually) from the front lens element of the objective to the specimen, or cover glass. The higher the the closer
the lens will be to the specimen and the more chances there are of breaking the cover slip and damaging both the
specimen and the lens. The focal length of an objective lens is different than the working distance. This is because
objective lenses are made of a combination of lenses and the focal length is measured from inside the barrel. The
working distance is a parameter that microscopists can use more readily as it is measured from the outermost lens.
The working distance decreases as the and magnification both increase.
The term in general is called the -number and is used to denote the light per unit area reaching the image
plane. In photography, an image of an object at infinity is formed at the focal point and the -number is given by the
ratio of the focal length of the lens and the diameter of the aperture controlling the light into the lens (see
Figure 26.17(b)). If the acceptance angle is small the of the lens can also be used as given below.
26.24
As the -number decreases, the camera is able to gather light from a larger angle, giving wide-angle photography.
As usual there is a trade-off. A greater means less light reaches the image plane. A setting of usually
allows one to take pictures in bright sunlight as the aperture diameter is small. In optical fibers, light needs to be
focused into the fiber.Figure 26.18shows the angle used in calculating the of an optical fiber.
FIGURE26.18Light rays enter an optical fiber. The numerical aperture of the optical fiber can be determined by using the angle
Can the be larger than 1.00? The answer is ‘yes’ if we use immersion lenses in which a medium such as oil,
glycerine or water is placed between the objective and the microscope cover slip. This minimizes the mismatch in
refractive indices as light rays go through different media, generally providing a greater light-gathering ability and an
increase in resolution.Figure 26.19shows light rays when using air and immersion lenses.
FIGURE26.19Light rays from a specimen entering the objective. Paths for immersion medium of air (a), water (b) , and oil (c)
are shown. The water and oil immersions allow more rays to enter the objective, increasing the resolution.
When using a microscope we do not see the entire extent of the sample. Depending on the eyepiece and objective
lens we see a restricted region which we say is the field of view. The objective is then manipulated in two-
dimensions above the sample to view other regions of the sample. Electronic scanning of either the objective or the
sample is used in scanning microscopy. The image formed at each point during the scanning is combined using a
PAGE: 1188
1170 26 • Vision and Optical Instruments
computer to generate an image of a larger region of the sample at a selected magnification.
When using a microscope, we rely on gathering light to form an image. Hence most specimens need to be
illuminated, particularly at higher magnifications, when observing details that are so small that they reflect only
small amounts of light. To make such objects easily visible, the intensity of light falling on them needs to be
increased. Special illuminating systems called condensers are used for this purpose. The type of condenser that is
suitable for an application depends on how the specimen is examined, whether by transmission, scattering or
reflecting. SeeFigure 26.20for an example of each. White light sources are common and lasers are often used.
Laser light illumination tends to be quite intense and it is important to ensure that the light does not result in the
degradation of the specimen.
FIGURE26.20Illumination of a specimen in a microscope. (a) Transmitted light from a condenser lens. (b) Transmitted light from a mirror
condenser. (c) Dark field illumination by scattering (the illuminating beam misses the objective lens). (d) High magnification illumination
with reflected light – normally laser light.
We normally associate microscopes with visible light, but x ray and electron microscopes provide greater resolution.
The focusing and basic physics is the same as that just described, even though the lenses require different
technology. The electron microscope requires vacuum chambers so that the electrons can proceed unheeded.
Magnifications of 50 million times provide the ability to determine positions of individual atoms within materials. An
electron microscope is shown inFigure 26.21. We do not use our eyes to form images; rather images are recorded
electronically and displayed on computers. In fact observing and saving images formed by optical microscopes on
computers is now done routinely. Video recordings of what occurs in a microscope can be made for viewing by many
people at later dates. Advances in this powerful technology continue. In the 1990s, Pratibha L. Gai invented the
environmental transmission electron microscope (ETEM), which was the first device capable of observing individual
atoms in chemical reactions.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1189
26.5 • Telescopes 1171
FIGURE26.21An electron microscope has the capability to image individual atoms on a material. The microscope uses vacuum
technology, sophisticated detectors and state of the art image processing software. Researchers use the devices in their work on biological
and, in the case of Miaofang Chi (pictured), lithium ion battery materials and fuel cell catalysts. (credit: Oak Ridge National Laboratory)
FIGURE26.22A natural community of bacteria growing on a single grain of sand, which was imaged using a Scanning Electron Microscope.
(credit: The Lewis Lab at Northeastern University. Image created by Anthony D’Onofrio, William H. Fowle, Eric J. Stewart, and Kim Lewis.)
Take-Home Experiment: Make a Lens
Look through a clear glass or plastic bottle and describe what you see. Now fill the bottle with water and
describe what you see. Use the water bottle as a lens to produce the image of a bright object and estimate the
focal length of the water bottle lens. How is the focal length a function of the depth of water in the bottle?
26.5 Telescopes
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Outline the invention of a telescope.
• Describe the working of a telescope.
Telescopes are meant for viewing distant objects, producing an image that is larger than the image that can be seen
with the unaided eye. Telescopes gather far more light than the eye, allowing dim objects to be observed with
greater magnification and better resolution. Although Galileo is often credited with inventing the telescope, he
actually did not. What he did was more important. He constructed several early telescopes, was the first to study the
heavens with them, and made monumental discoveries using them. Among these are the moons of Jupiter, the
craters and mountains on the Moon, the details of sunspots, and the fact that the Milky Way is composed of vast
numbers of individual stars.
Figure 26.23(a) shows a telescope made of two lenses, the convex objective and the concave eyepiece, the same
construction used by Galileo. Such an arrangement produces an upright image and is used in spyglasses and opera
PAGE: 1190
1172 26 • Vision and Optical Instruments
glasses.
FIGURE26.23(a) Galileo made telescopes with a convex objective and a concave eyepiece. These produce an upright image and are used
in spyglasses. (b) Most simple telescopes have two convex lenses. The objective forms a case 1 image that is the object for the eyepiece.
The eyepiece forms a case 2 final image that is magnified.
The most common two-lens telescope, like the simple microscope, uses two convex lenses and is shown inFigure
26.23(b). The object is so far away from the telescope that it is essentially at infinity compared with the focal
lengths of the lenses ( ). The first image is thus produced at , as shown in the figure. To prove this,
note that
26.25
Because , this simplifies to
26.26
which implies that , as claimed. It is true that for any distant object and any lens or mirror, the image is at
the focal length.
The first image formed by a telescope objective as seen inFigure 26.23(b) will not be large compared with what you
might see by looking at the object directly. For example, the spot formed by sunlight focused on a piece of paper by
a magnifying glass is the image of the Sun, and it is small. The telescope eyepiece (like the microscope eyepiece)
magnifies this first image. The distance between the eyepiece and the objective lens is made slightly less than the
sum of their focal lengths so that the first image is closer to the eyepiece than its focal length. That is, is less
than , and so the eyepiece forms a case 2 image that is large and to the left for easy viewing. If the angle
subtended by an object as viewed by the unaided eye is , and the angle subtended by the telescope image is ,
then theangular magnification is defined to be their ratio. That is, . It can be shown that the angular
magnification of a telescope is related to the focal lengths of the objective and eyepiece; and is given by
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1191
26.5 • Telescopes 1173
26.27
The minus sign indicates the image is inverted. To obtain the greatest angular magnification, it is best to have a long
focal length objective and a short focal length eyepiece. The greater the angular magnification , the larger an
object will appear when viewed through a telescope, making more details visible. Limits to observable details are
imposed by many factors, including lens quality and atmospheric disturbance.
The image in most telescopes is inverted, which is unimportant for observing the stars but a real problem for other
applications, such as telescopes on ships or telescopic gun sights. If an upright image is needed, Galileo’s
arrangement inFigure 26.23(a) can be used. But a more common arrangement is to use a third convex lens as an
eyepiece, increasing the distance between the first two and inverting the image once again as seen inFigure 26.24.
FIGURE26.24This arrangement of three lenses in a telescope produces an upright final image. The first two lenses are far enough apart
that the second lens inverts the image of the first one more time. The third lens acts as a magnifier and keeps the image upright and in a
location that is easy to view.
A telescope can also be made with a concave mirror as its first element or objective, since a concave mirror acts like
a convex lens as seen inFigure 26.25. Flat mirrors are often employed in optical instruments to make them more
compact or to send light to cameras and other sensing devices. There are many advantages to using mirrors rather
than lenses for telescope objectives. Mirrors can be constructed much larger than lenses and can, thus, gather large
amounts of light, as needed to view distant galaxies, for example. Large and relatively flat mirrors have very long
focal lengths, so that great angular magnification is possible.
FIGURE26.25A two-element telescope composed of a mirror as the objective and a lens for the eyepiece is shown. This telescope forms
an image in the same manner as the two-convex-lens telescope already discussed, but it does not suffer from chromatic aberrations. Such
telescopes can gather more light, since larger mirrors than lenses can be constructed.
Telescopes, like microscopes, can utilize a range of frequencies from the electromagnetic spectrum.Figure 26.26(a)
shows the Australia Telescope Compact Array, which uses six 22-m antennas for mapping the southern skies using
radio waves.Figure 26.26(b) shows the focusing of x rays on the Chandra X-ray Observatory—a satellite orbiting
earth since 1999 and looking at high temperature events as exploding stars, quasars, and black holes. X rays, with
PAGE: 1192
1174 26 • Vision and Optical Instruments
much more energy and shorter wavelengths than RF and light, are mainly absorbed and not reflected when incident
perpendicular to the medium. But they can be reflected when incident at small glancing angles, much like a rock will
skip on a lake if thrown at a small angle. The mirrors for the Chandra consist of a long barrelled pathway and 4 pairs
of mirrors to focus the rays at a point 10 meters away from the entrance. The mirrors are extremely smooth and
consist of a glass ceramic base with a thin coating of metal (iridium). Four pairs of precision manufactured mirrors
are exquisitely shaped and aligned so that x rays ricochet off the mirrors like bullets off a wall, focusing on a spot.
FIGURE26.26(a) The Australia Telescope Compact Array at Narrabri (500 km NW of Sydney). (credit: Ian Bailey) (b) The focusing of x rays
on the ChandraObservatory, a satellite orbiting earth. X rays ricochet off 4 pairs of mirrors forming a barrelled pathway leading to the focus
point. (credit: NASA)
A current exciting development is a collaborative effort involving 17 countries to construct a Square Kilometre Array
(SKA) of telescopes capable of covering from 80 MHz to 2 GHz. The initial stage of the project is the construction of
the Australian Square Kilometre Array Pathfinder in Western Australia (seeFigure 26.27). The project will use
cutting-edge technologies such asadaptive opticsin which the lens or mirror is constructed from lots of carefully
aligned tiny lenses and mirrors that can be manipulated using computers. A range of rapidly changing distortions
can be minimized by deforming or tilting the tiny lenses and mirrors. The use of adaptive optics in vision correction is
a current area of research.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1193
26.6 • Aberrations 1175
FIGURE26.27An artist’s impression of the Australian Square Kilometre Array Pathfinder in Western Australia is displayed. (credit: SPDO,
XILOSTUDIOS)
26.6 Aberrations
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe optical aberration.
Real lenses behave somewhat differently from how they are modeled using the thin lens equations, producing
aberrations. An aberration is a distortion in an image. There are a variety of aberrations due to a lens size, material,
thickness, and position of the object. One common type of aberration is chromatic aberration, which is related to
color. Since the index of refraction of lenses depends on color or wavelength, images are produced at different
places and with different magnifications for different colors. (The law of reflection is independent of wavelength,
and so mirrors do not have this problem. This is another advantage for mirrors in optical systems such as
telescopes.)Figure 26.28(a) shows chromatic aberration for a single convex lens and its partial correction with a
two-lens system. Violet rays are bent more than red, since they have a higher index of refraction and are thus
focused closer to the lens. The diverging lens partially corrects this, although it is usually not possible to do so
completely. Lenses of different materials and having different dispersions may be used. For example an achromatic
doublet consisting of a converging lens made of crown glass and a diverging lens made of flint glass in contact can
dramatically reduce chromatic aberration (seeFigure 26.28(b)).
Quite often in an imaging system the object is off-center. Consequently, different parts of a lens or mirror do not
refract or reflect the image to the same point. This type of aberration is called a coma and is shown inFigure 26.29.
The image in this case often appears pear-shaped. Another common aberration is spherical aberration where rays
converging from the outer edges of a lens converge to a focus closer to the lens and rays closer to the axis focus
further (seeFigure 26.30). Aberrations due to astigmatism in the lenses of the eyes are discussed inVision
Correction, and a chart used to detect astigmatism is shown inFigure 26.8. Such aberrations and can also be an
issue with manufactured lenses.
PAGE: 1194
1176 26 • Vision and Optical Instruments
FIGURE26.28(a) Chromatic aberration is caused by the dependence of a lens’s index of refraction on color (wavelength). The lens is more
powerful for violet (V) than for red (R), producing images with different locations and magnifications. (b) Multiple-lens systems can partially
correct chromatic aberrations, but they may require lenses of different materials and add to the expense of optical systems such as
cameras.
FIGURE26.29A coma is an aberration caused by an object that is off-center, often resulting in a pear-shaped image. The rays originate
from points that are not on the optical axis and they do not converge at one common focal point.
FIGURE26.30Spherical aberration is caused by rays focusing at different distances from the lens.
The image produced by an optical system needs to be bright enough to be discerned. It is often a challenge to
obtain a sufficiently bright image. The brightness is determined by the amount of light passing through the optical
system. The optical components determining the brightness are the diameter of the lens and the diameter of pupils,
diaphragms or aperture stops placed in front of lenses. Optical systems often have entrance and exit pupils to
specifically reduce aberrations but they inevitably reduce brightness as well. Consequently, optical systems need to
strike a balance between the various components used. The iris in the eye dilates and constricts, acting as an
entrance pupil. You can see objects more clearly by looking through a small hole made with your hand in the shape
of a fist. Squinting, or using a small hole in a piece of paper, also will make the object sharper.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1195
26.6 • Aberrations 1177
So how are aberrations corrected? The lenses may also have specially shaped surfaces, as opposed to the simple
spherical shape that is relatively easy to produce. Expensive camera lenses are large in diameter, so that they can
gather more light, and need several elements to correct for various aberrations. Further, advances in materials
science have resulted in lenses with a range of refractive indices—technically referred to as graded index (GRIN)
lenses. Spectacles often have the ability to provide a range of focusing ability using similar techniques. GRIN lenses
are particularly important at the end of optical fibers in endoscopes. Advanced computing techniques allow for a
range of corrections on images after the image has been collected and certain characteristics of the optical system
are known. Some of these techniques are sophisticated versions of what are available on commercial packages like
Adobe Photoshop.
PAGE: 1196
1178 26 • Glossary
Glossary
aberration failure of rays to converge at one focus myopia a visual defect in which distant objects
because of limitations or defects in a lens or mirror appear blurred because their images are focused in
accommodation the ability of the eye to adjust its front of the retina rather than being focused on the
focal length is known as accommodation retina
adaptive optics optical technology in which near point the point nearest the eye at which an
computers adjust the lenses and mirrors in a device object is accurately focused on the retina at full
to correct for image distortions accommodation
angular magnification a ratio related to the focal nearsightedness another term for myopia, a visual
lengths of the objective and eyepiece and given as defect in which distant objects appear blurred
because their images are focused in front of the
retina rather than being focused on the retina
astigmatism the result of an inability of the cornea to
numerical aperture a number or measure that
properly focus an image onto the retina
expresses the ability of a lens to resolve fine detail
color constancy a part of the visual perception
in an object being observed. Derived by
system that allows people to perceive color in a
mathematical formula
variety of conditions and to see some consistency in
where is the refractive index of the medium between
the color
the lens and the specimen and
compound microscope a microscope constructed
from two convex lenses, the first serving as the objective lens the lens nearest to the object being
ocular lens(close to the eye) and the second serving examined
as the objective lens presbyopia a condition in which the lens of the eye
eyepiece the lens or combination of lenses in an becomes progressively unable to focus on objects
optical instrument nearest to the eye of the close to the viewer
observer retinex a theory proposed to explain color and
far point the object point imaged by the eye onto the brightness perception and constancies; is a
retina in an unaccommodated eye combination of the words retina and cortex, which
farsightedness another term for hyperopia, the are the two areas responsible for the processing of
condition of an eye where incoming rays of light visual information
reach the retina before they converge into a focused retinex theory of color vision the ability to perceive
image color in an ambient-colored environment
hues identity of a color as it relates specifically to the rods and cones two types of photoreceptors in the
spectrum human retina; rods are responsible for vision at low
hyperopia the condition of an eye where incoming light levels, while cones are active at higher light
rays of light reach the retina before they converge levels
into a focused image simplified theory of color vision a theory that states
laser vision correction a medical procedure used to that there are three primary colors, which
correct astigmatism and eyesight deficiencies such correspond to the three types of cones
as myopia and hyperopia
Section Summary
26.1Physics of the Eye • The loss of the ability to accommodate with age is
called presbyopia, which is corrected by the use of
• Image formation by the eye is adequately
a converging lens to add power for close vision.
described by the thin lens equations:
26.2Vision Correction
• Nearsightedness, or myopia, is the inability to see
• The eye produces a real image on the retina by
distant objects and is corrected with a diverging
adjusting its focal length and power in a process
lens to reduce power.
called accommodation.
• Farsightedness, or hyperopia, is the inability to see
• For close vision, the eye is fully accommodated
close objects and is corrected with a converging
and has its greatest power, whereas for distant
lens to increase power.
vision, it is totally relaxed and has its smallest
• In myopia and hyperopia, the corrective lenses
power.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1197
26 • Conceptual Questions 1179
produce images at a distance that the person can where is the magnification of the objective and
see clearly—the far point and near point, is the magnification of the eyepiece, such as for
respectively. a microscope.
• Microscopes are instruments for allowing us to see
26.3Color and Color Vision
detail we would not be able to see with the
• The eye has four types of light receptors—rods and unaided eye and consist of a range of components.
three types of color-sensitive cones. • The eyepiece and objective contribute to the
• The rods are good for night vision, peripheral magnification. The numerical aperture of an
vision, and motion changes, while the cones are objective is given by
responsible for central vision and color.
• We perceive many hues, from light having mixtures where is the refractive index and the angle of
of wavelengths. acceptance.
• A simplified theory of color vision states that there • Immersion techniques are often used to improve
are three primary colors, which correspond to the the light gathering ability of microscopes. The
three types of cones, and that various specimen is illuminated by transmitted, scattered
combinations of the primary colors produce all the or reflected light though a condenser.
hues. • The describes the light gathering ability of a
• The true color of an object is related to its relative lens. It is given by
absorption of various wavelengths of light. The
color of a light source is related to the wavelengths
it produces. 26.5Telescopes
• Color constancy is the ability of the eye-brain
system to discern the true color of an object • Simple telescopes can be made with two lenses.
illuminated by various light sources. They are used for viewing objects at large
• The retinex theory of color vision explains color distances and utilize the entire range of the
constancy by postulating the existence of three electromagnetic spectrum.
retinexes or image systems, associated with the • The angular magnification M for a telescope is
three types of cones that are compared to obtain given by
sophisticated information.
26.4Microscopes
where is the angle subtended by an object
viewed by the unaided eye, is the angle
• The microscope is a multiple-element system
subtended by a magnified image, and and
having more than a single lens or mirror.
are the focal lengths of the objective and the
• Many optical devices contain more than a single
eyepiece.
lens or mirror. These are analysed by considering
each element sequentially. The image formed by 26.6Aberrations
the first is the object for the second, and so on.
• Aberrations or image distortions can arise due to
The same ray tracing and thin lens techniques
the finite thickness of optical instruments,
apply to each lens element.
imperfections in the optical components, and
• The overall magnification of a multiple-element
limitations on the ways in which the components
system is the product of the magnifications of its
are used.
individual elements. For a two-element system
• The means for correcting aberrations range from
with an objective and an eyepiece, this is
better components to computational techniques.
Conceptual Questions
26.1Physics of the Eye 2. A cataract is cloudiness in the lens of the eye. Is
light dispersed or diffused by it?
1. If the lens of a person’s eye is removed because of
3. When laser light is shone into a relaxed normal-
cataracts (as has been done since ancient times),
vision eye to repair a tear by spot-welding the retina
why would you expect a spectacle lens of about 16
to the back of the eye, the rays entering the eye
D to be prescribed?
must be parallel. Why?
PAGE: 1198
1180 26 • Problems & Exercises
4. How does the power of a dry contact lens compare 12. There are different types of color blindness
with its power when resting on the tear layer of the related to the malfunction of different types of
eye? Explain. cones. Why would it be particularly useful to study
5. Why is your vision so blurry when you open your those rare individuals who are color blind only in
eyes while swimming under water? How does a one eye or who have a different type of color
face mask enable clear vision? blindness in each eye?
13. Propose a way to study the function of the rods
26.2Vision Correction alone, given they can sense light about 1000
times dimmer than the cones.
6. It has become common to replace the cataract-
clouded lens of the eye with an internal lens. This
26.4Microscopes
intraocular lens can be chosen so that the person
has perfect distant vision. Will the person be able to 14. Geometric optics describes the interaction of light
read without glasses? If the person was with macroscopic objects. Why, then, is it correct
nearsighted, is the power of the intraocular lens to use geometric optics to analyse a microscope’s
greater or less than the removed lens? image?
7. If the cornea is to be reshaped (this can be done 15. The image produced by the microscope inFigure
surgically or with contact lenses) to correct myopia, 26.16cannot be projected. Could extra lenses or
should its curvature be made greater or smaller? mirrors project it? Explain.
Explain. Also explain how hyperopia can be 16. Why not have the objective of a microscope form a
corrected. case 2 image with a large magnification? (Hint:
8. If there is a fixed percent uncertainty in LASIK Consider the location of that image and the
reshaping of the cornea, why would you expect difficulty that would pose for using the eyepiece
those people with the greatest correction to have a as a magnifier.)
poorer chance of normal distant vision after the 17. What advantages do oil immersion objectives
procedure? offer?
9. A person with presbyopia has lost some or all of the 18. How does the of a microscope compare with
ability to accommodate the power of the eye. If the of an optical fiber?
such a person’s distant vision is corrected with
LASIK, will she still need reading glasses? Explain. 26.5Telescopes
19. If you want your microscope or telescope to
26.3Color and Color Vision
project a real image onto a screen, how would you
10. A pure red object on a black background seems to change the placement of the eyepiece relative to
disappear when illuminated with pure green light. the objective?
Explain why.
11. What is color constancy, and what are its 26.6Aberrations
limitations?
20. List the various types of aberrations. What causes
them and how can each be reduced?
Problems & Exercises
26.1Physics of the Eye 3. (a) The print in many books averages 3.50 mm in
height. How high is the image of the print on the
Unless otherwise stated, the lens-to-retina distance
retina when the book is held 30.0 cm from the eye?
is 2.00 cm.
(b) Compare the size of the print to the sizes of rods
1. What is the power of the eye when viewing an and cones in the fovea and discuss the possible
object 50.0 cm away? details observable in the letters. (The eye-brain
2. Calculate the power of the eye when viewing an system can perform better because of
object 3.00 m away. interconnections and higher order image
processing.)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1199
26 • Problems & Exercises 1181
4. Suppose a certain person’s visual acuity is such that 15. The far point of a myopic administrator is 50.0 cm.
he can see objects clearly that form an image (a) What is the relaxed power of their eyes? (b) If
high on his retina. What is the maximum they have the normal 8.00% ability to
distance at which he can read the 75.0 cm high accommodate, what is the closest object they can
letters on the side of an airplane? see clearly?
5. People who do very detailed work close up, such as 16. A very myopic man has a far point of 20.0 cm.
jewellers, often can see objects clearly at much What power contact lens (when on the eye) will
closer distance than the normal 25 cm. correct his distant vision?
(a) What is the power of the eyes of a woman who 17. Repeat the previous problem for eyeglasses held
can see an object clearly at a distance of only 8.00 1.50 cm from the eyes.
cm? 18. A myopic person sees that their contact lens
(b) What is the size of an image of a 1.00 mm prescription is . What is their far point?
object, such as lettering inside a ring, held at this 19. Repeat the previous problem for glasses that are
distance? 1.75 cm from the eyes.
(c) What would the size of the image be if the object 20. The contact lens prescription for a mildly
were held at the normal 25.0 cm distance? farsighted person is 0.750 D, and the person has a
near point of 29.0 cm. What is the power of the
26.2Vision Correction tear layer between the cornea and the lens if the
correction is ideal, taking the tear layer into
6. What is the far point of a person whose eyes have a
account?
relaxed power of 50.5 D?
21. A nearsighted man cannot see objects clearly
7. What is the near point of a person whose eyes have
beyond 20 cm from his eyes. How close must he
an accommodated power of 53.5 D?
stand to a mirror in order to see what he is doing
8. (a) A laser vision correction reshaping the cornea of
when he shaves?
a myopic patient reduces the power of his eye by
22. A teacher sees that a child’s contact lens
9.00 D, with a uncertainty in the final
prescription is 0.750 D. What is the child’s near
correction. What is the range of diopters for
point?
spectacle lenses that this person might need after
23. Repeat the previous problem for glasses that are
LASIK procedure? (b) Was the person nearsighted
2.20 cm from the eyes.
or farsighted before the procedure? How do you
24. The contact lens prescription for a nearsighted
know?
person is and the person has a far point
9. In a LASIK vision correction, the power of a
of 22.5 cm. What is the power of the tear layer
patient’s eye is increased by 3.00 D. Assuming this
between the cornea and the lens if the correction
produces normal close vision, what was the
is ideal, taking the tear layer into account?
patient’s near point before the procedure?
25. Unreasonable Results
10. What was the previous far point of a patient who
A boy has a near point of 50 cm and a far point of
had laser vision correction that reduced the power
500 cm. Will a lens correct his far point to
of her eye by 7.00 D, producing normal distant
infinity?
vision for her?
11. A severely myopic patient has a far point of 5.00
26.4Microscopes
cm. By how many diopters should the power of his
eye be reduced in laser vision correction to obtain 26. A microscope with an overall magnification of 800
normal distant vision for him? has an objective that magnifies by 200. (a) What is
12. A student’s eyes, while reading the blackboard, the magnification of the eyepiece? (b) If there are
have a power of 51.0 D. How far is the board from two other objectives that can be used, having
his eyes? magnifications of 100 and 400, what other total
13. The power of a physician’s eyes is 53.0 D while magnifications are possible?
examining a patient. How far from her eyes is the 27. (a) What magnification is produced by a 0.150 cm
feature being examined? focal length microscope objective that is 0.155 cm
14. A young woman with normal distant vision has a from the object being viewed? (b) What is the
10.0% ability to accommodate (that is, increase) overall magnification if an eyepiece (one that
the power of her eyes. What is the closest object produces a magnification of 8.00) is used?
she can see clearly?
PAGE: 1200
1182 26 • Problems & Exercises
28. (a) Where does an object need to be placed 36. A small telescope has a concave mirror with a
relative to a microscope for its 0.500 cm focal 2.00 m radius of curvature for its objective. Its
length objective to produce a magnification of eyepiece is a 4.00 cm focal length lens. (a) What is
? (b) Where should the 5.00 cm focal length the telescope’s angular magnification? (b) What
eyepiece be placed to produce a further fourfold angle is subtended by a 25,000 km diameter
(4.00) magnification? sunspot? (c) What is the angle of its telescopic
29. You switch from a oil immersion image?
objective to a oil immersion 37. A binocular produces an angular
objective. What are the acceptance angles for magnification of , acting like a telescope.
each? Compare and comment on the values. (Mirrors are used to make the image upright.) If
Which would you use first to locate the target area the binoculars have objective lenses with a 75.0
on your specimen? cm focal length, what is the focal length of the
30. An amoeba is 0.305 cm away from the 0.300 cm eyepiece lenses?
focal length objective lens of a microscope. (a) 38. Construct Your Own Problem
Where is the image formed by the objective lens? Consider a telescope of the type used by Galileo,
(b) What is this image’s magnification? (c) An having a convex objective and a concave eyepiece
eyepiece with a 2.00 cm focal length is placed as illustrated inFigure 26.23(a). Construct a
20.0 cm from the objective. Where is the final problem in which you calculate the location and
image? (d) What magnification is produced by the size of the image produced. Among the things to
eyepiece? (e) What is the overall magnification? be considered are the focal lengths of the lenses
(SeeFigure 26.16.) and their relative placements as well as the size
31. You are using a standard microscope with a and location of the object. Verify that the angular
objective and switch to a magnification is greater than one. That is, the
objective. What are the acceptance angle subtended at the eye by the image is greater
angles for each? Compare and comment on the than the angle subtended by the object.
values. Which would you use first to locate the
target area on of your specimen? (SeeFigure 26.6Aberrations
26.17.)
39. Integrated Concepts
32. Unreasonable Results
(a) During laser vision correction, a brief burst of
Your friends show you an image through a
193 nm ultraviolet light is projected onto the
microscope. They tell you that the microscope has
cornea of the patient. It makes a spot 1.00 mm in
an objective with a 0.500 cm focal length and an
diameter and deposits 0.500 mJ of energy.
eyepiece with a 5.00 cm focal length. The
Calculate the depth of the layer ablated, assuming
resulting overall magnification is 250,000. Are
the corneal tissue has the same properties as
these viable values for a microscope?
water and is initially at . The tissue’s
temperature is increased to and
26.5Telescopes
evaporated without further temperature increase.
Unless otherwise stated, the lens-to-retina distance (b) Does your answer imply that the shape of the
is 2.00 cm. cornea can be finely controlled?
33. What is the angular magnification of a telescope
that has a 100 cm focal length objective and a
2.50 cm focal length eyepiece?
34. Find the distance between the objective and
eyepiece lenses in the telescope in the above
problem needed to produce a final image very far
from the observer, where vision is most relaxed.
Note that a telescope is normally used to view
very distant objects.
35. A large reflecting telescope has an objective
mirror with a radius of curvature. What
angular magnification does it produce when a 3.00
cm focal length eyepiece is used?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1201
26 • Problems & Exercises 1183
40. Critical ThinkingA microscope has the objective
lens 6.00 mm from an object. The focal length of
the objective lens is 4.00 mm. The eyepiece has a
focal length of 50.0 mm and is initially 25.0 mm
from the objective lens. (a) The objective lens is
moved to 5.00 mm from the objective, effectively
lengthening the microscope. How does this affect
the magnification of the microscope? (b) Does
moving the objective increase closer to the object
increase or decrease the magnification, or does it
remain the same? (c) Do you think moving the
objective from 6 mm to 7 mm from the object will
increase or decrease the magnification of the
microscope, or will it likely remain the same? (d)
What indicates whether the image is upright or
inverted?
PAGE: 1202
1184 26 • Problems & Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1203
CHAPTER 27
Wave Optics
FIGURE27.1Katharine Burr Blodgett (1898–1979) was a physicist and chemist who made significant advancements in the study of
surfaces and thin films. The trough she developed is still used in thousands of labs around the world, and her invention of non-reflective
glass has had massive impact in cinema, medical, and scientific research arenas. (credit: Smithsonian Institution)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
27.1The Wave Aspect of Light: Interference
27.2Huygens's Principle: Diffraction
27.3Young’s Double Slit Experiment
27.4Multiple Slit Diffraction
27.5Single Slit Diffraction
27.6Limits of Resolution: The Rayleigh Criterion
27.7Thin Film Interference
27.8Polarization
27.9*Extended Topic* Microscopy Enhanced by the Wave Characteristics of Light
INTRODUCTION TO WAVE OPTICS Examine a compact disc under white light, noting the colors observed and
locations of the colors. Determine if the spectra are formed by diffraction from circular lines centered at the middle
of the disc and, if so, what is their spacing. If not, determine the type of spacing. Also with the CD, explore the
spectra of a few light sources, such as a candle flame, incandescent bulb, halogen light, and fluorescent light.
Knowing the spacing of the rows of pits in the compact disc, estimate the maximum spacing that will allow the given
number of megabytes of information to be stored.
If you have ever looked at the reds, blues, and greens in a sunlit soap bubble and wondered how straw-colored
soapy water could produce them, you have hit upon one of the many phenomena that can only be explained by the
wave character of light (seeFigure 27.2). The same is true for the colors seen in an oil slick or in the light reflected
from a compact disc. These and other interesting phenomena, such as the dispersion of white light into a rainbow of
PAGE: 1204
1186 27 • Wave Optics
colors when passed through a narrow slit, cannot be explained fully by geometric optics. In these cases, light
interacts with small objects and exhibits its wave characteristics. The branch of optics that considers the behavior of
light when it exhibits wave characteristics (particularly when it interacts with small objects) is called wave optics
(sometimes called physical optics). It is the topic of this chapter.
FIGURE27.2These soap bubbles exhibit brilliant colors when exposed to sunlight. How are the colors produced if they are not pigments in
the soap? (credit: Scott Robinson, Flickr)
27.1 The Wave Aspect of Light: Interference
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Discuss the wave character of light.
• Identify the changes when light enters a medium.
We know that visible light is the type of electromagnetic wave to which our eyes respond. Like all other
electromagnetic waves, it obeys the equation
27.1
where is the speed of light in vacuum, is the frequency of the electromagnetic waves, and is its
wavelength. The range of visible wavelengths is approximately 380 to 760 nm. As is true for all waves, light travels
in straight lines and acts like a ray when it interacts with objects several times as large as its wavelength. However,
when it interacts with smaller objects, it displays its wave characteristics prominently. Interference is the hallmark
of a wave, and inFigure 27.3both the ray and wave characteristics of light can be seen. The laser beam emitted by
the observatory epitomizes a ray, traveling in a straight line. However, passing a pure-wavelength beam through
vertical slits with a size close to the wavelength of the beam reveals the wave character of light, as the beam
spreads out horizontally into a pattern of bright and dark regions caused by systematic constructive and destructive
interference. Rather than spreading out, a ray would continue traveling straight ahead after passing through slits.
Making Connections: Waves
The most certain indication of a wave is interference. This wave characteristic is most prominent when the wave
interacts with an object that is not large compared with the wavelength. Interference is observed for water
waves, sound waves, light waves, and (as we will see inSpecial Relativity) for matter waves, such as electrons
scattered from a crystal.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1205
27.2 • Huygens's Principle: Diffraction 1187
FIGURE27.3(a) The laser beam emitted by an observatory acts like a ray, traveling in a straight line. This laser beam is from the Paranal
Observatory of the European Southern Observatory. (credit: Yuri Beletsky, European Southern Observatory) (b) A laser beam passing
through a grid of vertical slits produces an interference pattern—characteristic of a wave. (credit: Shim'on and Slava Rybka, Wikimedia
Commons)
Light has wave characteristics in various media as well as in a vacuum. When light goes from a vacuum to some
medium, like water, its speed and wavelength change, but its frequency remains the same. (We can think of light
as a forced oscillation that must have the frequency of the original source.) The speed of light in a medium is
, where is its index of refraction. If we divide both sides of equation by , we get .
This implies that , where is thewavelength in a mediumand that
27.2
where is the wavelength in vacuum and is the medium’s index of refraction. Therefore, the wavelength of light is
smaller in any medium than it is in vacuum. In water, for example, which has , the range of visible
wavelengths is to , or . Although wavelengths change while
traveling from one medium to another, colors do not, since colors are associated with frequency.
27.2 Huygens's Principle: Diffraction
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Discuss the propagation of transverse waves.
• Discuss Huygens’s principle.
• Explain the bending of light.
Figure 27.4shows how a transverse wave looks as viewed from above and from the side. A light wave can be
imagined to propagate like this, although we do not actually see it wiggling through space. From above, we view the
wavefronts (or wave crests) as we would by looking down on the ocean waves. The side view would be a graph of
the electric or magnetic field. The view from above is perhaps the most useful in developing concepts about wave
optics.
PAGE: 1206
1188 27 • Wave Optics
FIGURE27.4A transverse wave, such as an electromagnetic wave like light, as viewed from above and from the side. The direction of
propagation is perpendicular to the wavefronts (or wave crests) and is represented by an arrow like a ray.
The Dutch scientist Christiaan Huygens (1629–1695) developed a useful technique for determining in detail how
and where waves propagate. Starting from some known position,Huygens’s principlestates that:
Every point on a wavefront is a source of wavelets that spread out in the forward direction at the same speed
as the wave itself. The new wavefront is a line tangent to all of the wavelets.
Figure 27.5shows how Huygens’s principle is applied. A wavefront is the long edge that moves, for example, the
crest or the trough. Each point on the wavefront emits a semicircular wave that moves at the propagation speed .
These are drawn at a time later, so that they have moved a distance . The new wavefront is a line tangent to
the wavelets and is where we would expect the wave to be a time later. Huygens’s principle works for all types of
waves, including water waves, sound waves, and light waves. We will find it useful not only in describing how light
waves propagate, but also in explaining the laws of reflection and refraction. In addition, we will see that Huygens’s
principle tells us how and where light rays interfere.
FIGURE27.5Huygens’s principle applied to a straight wavefront. Each point on the wavefront emits a semicircular wavelet that moves a
distance . The new wavefront is a line tangent to the wavelets.
Figure 27.6shows how a mirror reflects an incoming wave at an angle equal to the incident angle, verifying the law
of reflection. As the wavefront strikes the mirror, wavelets are first emitted from the left part of the mirror and then
the right. The wavelets closer to the left have had time to travel farther, producing a wavefront traveling in the
direction shown.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1207
27.2 • Huygens's Principle: Diffraction 1189
FIGURE27.6Huygens’s principle applied to a straight wavefront striking a mirror. The wavelets shown were emitted as each point on the
wavefront struck the mirror. The tangent to these wavelets shows that the new wavefront has been reflected at an angle equal to the
incident angle. The direction of propagation is perpendicular to the wavefront, as shown by the downward-pointing arrows.
The law of refraction can be explained by applying Huygens’s principle to a wavefront passing from one medium to
another (seeFigure 27.7). Each wavelet in the figure was emitted when the wavefront crossed the interface
between the media. Since the speed of light is smaller in the second medium, the waves do not travel as far in a
given time, and the new wavefront changes direction as shown. This explains why a ray changes direction to become
closer to the perpendicular when light slows down. Snell’s law can be derived from the geometry inFigure 27.7, but
this is left as an exercise for ambitious readers.
FIGURE27.7Huygens’s principle applied to a straight wavefront traveling from one medium to another where its speed is less. The ray
bends toward the perpendicular, since the wavelets have a lower speed in the second medium.
What happens when a wave passes through an opening, such as light shining through an open door into a dark
room? For light, we expect to see a sharp shadow of the doorway on the floor of the room, and we expect no light to
bend around corners into other parts of the room. When sound passes through a door, we expect to hear it
everywhere in the room and, thus, expect that sound spreads out when passing through such an opening (seeFigure
27.8). What is the difference between the behavior of sound waves and light waves in this case? The answer is that
light has very short wavelengths and acts like a ray. Sound has wavelengths on the order of the size of the door and
bends around corners (for frequency of 1000 Hz, , about three times
smaller than the width of the doorway).
PAGE: 1208
1190 27 • Wave Optics
FIGURE27.8(a) Light passing through a doorway makes a sharp outline on the floor. Since light’s wavelength is very small compared with
the size of the door, it acts like a ray. (b) Sound waves bend into all parts of the room, a wave effect, because their wavelength is similar to
the size of the door.
If we pass light through smaller openings, often called slits, we can use Huygens’s principle to see that light bends
as sound does (seeFigure 27.9). The bending of a wave around the edges of an opening or an obstacle is called
diffraction. Diffraction is a wave characteristic and occurs for all types of waves. If diffraction is observed for some
phenomenon, it is evidence that the phenomenon is a wave. Thus the horizontal diffraction of the laser beam after it
passes through slits inFigure 27.3is evidence that light is a wave.
FIGURE27.9Huygens’s principle applied to a straight wavefront striking an opening. The edges of the wavefront bend after passing
through the opening, a process called diffraction. The amount of bending is more extreme for a small opening, consistent with the fact that
wave characteristics are most noticeable for interactions with objects about the same size as the wavelength.
27.3 Young’s Double Slit Experiment
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the phenomena of interference.
• Define constructive interference for a double slit and destructive interference for a double slit.
Although Christiaan Huygens thought that light was a wave, Isaac Newton did not. Newton felt that there were other
explanations for color, and for the interference and diffraction effects that were observable at the time. Owing to
Newton’s tremendous stature, his view generally prevailed. The fact that Huygens’s principle worked was not
considered evidence that was direct enough to prove that light is a wave. The acceptance of the wave character of
light came many years later when, in 1801, the English physicist and physician Thomas Young (1773–1829) did his
now-classic double slit experiment (seeFigure 27.10).
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1209
27.3 • Young’s Double Slit Experiment 1191
FIGURE27.10Young’s double slit experiment. Here pure-wavelength light sent through a pair of vertical slits is diffracted into a pattern on
the screen of numerous vertical lines spread out horizontally. Without diffraction and interference, the light would simply make two lines on
the screen.
Why do we not ordinarily observe wave behavior for light, such as observed in Young’s double slit experiment? First,
light must interact with something small, such as the closely spaced slits used by Young, to show pronounced wave
effects. Furthermore, Young first passed light from a single source (the Sun) through a single slit to make the light
somewhat coherent. Bycoherent, we mean waves are in phase or have a definite phase relationship.Incoherent
means the waves have random phase relationships. Why did Young then pass the light through a double slit? The
answer to this question is that two slits provide two coherent light sources that then interfere constructively or
destructively. Young used sunlight, where each wavelength forms its own pattern, making the effect more difficult to
see. We illustrate the double slit experiment with monochromatic (single ) light to clarify the effect.Figure 27.11
shows the pure constructive and destructive interference of two waves having the same wavelength and amplitude.
FIGURE27.11The amplitudes of waves add. (a) Pure constructive interference is obtained when identical waves are in phase. (b) Pure
destructive interference occurs when identical waves are exactly out of phase, or shifted by half a wavelength.
When light passes through narrow slits, it is diffracted into semicircular waves, as shown inFigure 27.12(a). Pure
constructive interference occurs where the waves are crest to crest or trough to trough. Pure destructive
interference occurs where they are crest to trough. The light must fall on a screen and be scattered into our eyes for
us to see the pattern. An analogous pattern for water waves is shown inFigure 27.12(b). Note that regions of
constructive and destructive interference move out from the slits at well-defined angles to the original beam. These
PAGE: 1210
1192 27 • Wave Optics
angles depend on wavelength and the distance between the slits, as we shall see below.
FIGURE27.12Double slits produce two coherent sources of waves that interfere. (a) Light spreads out (diffracts) from each slit, because
the slits are narrow. These waves overlap and interfere constructively (bright lines) and destructively (dark regions). We can only see this if
the light falls onto a screen and is scattered into our eyes. (b) Double slit interference pattern for water waves are nearly identical to that for
light. Wave action is greatest in regions of constructive interference and least in regions of destructive interference. (c) When light that has
passed through double slits falls on a screen, we see a pattern such as this. (credit: PASCO)
To understand the double slit interference pattern, we consider how two waves travel from the slits to the screen, as
illustrated inFigure 27.13. Each slit is a different distance from a given point on the screen. Thus different numbers
of wavelengths fit into each path. Waves start out from the slits in phase (crest to crest), but they may end up out of
phase (crest to trough) at the screen if the paths differ in length by half a wavelength, interfering destructively as
shown inFigure 27.13(a). If the paths differ by a whole wavelength, then the waves arrive in phase (crest to crest) at
the screen, interfering constructively as shown inFigure 27.13(b). More generally, if the paths taken by the two
waves differ by any half-integral number of wavelengths [ , , , etc.], then destructive interference
occurs. Similarly, if the paths taken by the two waves differ by any integral number of wavelengths ( , , , etc.),
then constructive interference occurs.
Take-Home Experiment: Using Fingers as Slits
Look at a light, such as a street lamp or incandescent bulb, through the narrow gap between two fingers held
close together. What type of pattern do you see? How does it change when you allow the fingers to move a little
farther apart? Is it more distinct for a monochromatic source, such as the yellow light from a sodium vapor lamp,
than for an incandescent bulb?
FIGURE27.13Waves follow different paths from the slits to a common point on a screen. (a) Destructive interference occurs here, because
one path is a half wavelength longer than the other. The waves start in phase but arrive out of phase. (b) Constructive interference occurs
here because one path is a whole wavelength longer than the other. The waves start out and arrive in phase.
Figure 27.14shows how to determine the path length difference for waves traveling from two slits to a common
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1211
27.3 • Young’s Double Slit Experiment 1193
point on a screen. If the screen is a large distance away compared with the distance between the slits, then the
angle between the path and a line from the slits to the screen (see the figure) is nearly the same for each path. The
difference between the paths is shown in the figure; simple trigonometry shows it to be , where is the
distance between the slits. To obtainconstructive interference for a double slit, the path length difference must be
an integral multiple of the wavelength, or
27.3
Similarly, to obtaindestructive interference for a double slit, the path length difference must be a half-integral
multiple of the wavelength, or
27.4
where is the wavelength of the light, is the distance between slits, and is the angle from the original direction
of the beam as discussed above. We call theorderof the interference. For example, is fourth-order
interference.
FIGURE27.14The paths from each slit to a common point on the screen differ by an amount , assuming the distance to the screen is
much greater than the distance between slits (not to scale here).
The equations for double slit interference imply that a series of bright and dark lines are formed. For vertical slits,
the light spreads out horizontally on either side of the incident beam into a pattern called interference fringes,
illustrated inFigure 27.15. The intensity of the bright fringes falls off on either side, being brightest at the center.
The closer the slits are, the more is the spreading of the bright fringes. We can see this by examining the equation
27.5
For fixed and , the smaller is, the larger must be, since . This is consistent with our contention
that wave effects are most noticeable when the object the wave encounters (here, slits a distance apart) is small.
Small gives large , hence a large effect.
FIGURE27.15The interference pattern for a double slit has an intensity that falls off with angle. The photograph shows multiple bright and
dark lines, or fringes, formed by light passing through a double slit.
PAGE: 1212
1194 27 • Wave Optics
EXAMPLE 27.1
Finding a Wavelength from an Interference Pattern
Suppose you pass light from a He-Ne laser through two slits separated by 0.0100 mm and find that the third bright
line on a screen is formed at an angle of relative to the incident beam. What is the wavelength of the light?
Strategy
The third bright line is due to third-order constructive interference, which means that . We are given
and . The wavelength can thus be found using the equation for
constructive interference.
Solution
The equation is . Solving for the wavelength gives
27.6
Substituting known values yields
27.7
Discussion
To three digits, this is the wavelength of light emitted by the common He-Ne laser. Not by coincidence, this red color
is similar to that emitted by neon lights. More important, however, is the fact that interference patterns can be used
to measure wavelength. Young did this for visible wavelengths. This analytical technique is still widely used to
measure electromagnetic spectra. For a given order, the angle for constructive interference increases with , so that
spectra (measurements of intensity versus wavelength) can be obtained.
EXAMPLE 27.2
Calculating Highest Order Possible
Interference patterns do not have an infinite number of lines, since there is a limit to how big can be. What is the
highest-order constructive interference possible with the system described in the preceding example?
Strategy and Concept
The equation describes constructive interference. For fixed values of
and , the larger is, the larger is. However, the maximum value that can have is 1, for an angle of .
(Larger angles imply that light goes backward and does not reach the screen at all.) Let us find which corresponds
to this maximum diffraction angle.
Solution
Solving the equation for gives
27.8
Taking and substituting the values of and from the preceding example gives
27.9
Therefore, the largest integer can be is 15, or
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1213
27.4 • Multiple Slit Diffraction 1195
27.10
Discussion
The number of fringes depends on the wavelength and slit separation. The number of fringes will be very large for
large slit separations. However, if the slit separation becomes much greater than the wavelength, the intensity of the
interference pattern changes so that the screen has two bright lines cast by the slits, as expected when light
behaves like a ray. We also note that the fringes get fainter further away from the center. Consequently, not all 15
fringes may be observable.
27.4 Multiple Slit Diffraction
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Discuss the pattern obtained from diffraction grating.
• Explain diffraction grating effects.
An interesting thing happens if you pass light through a large number of evenly spaced parallel slits, called a
diffraction grating. An interference pattern is created that is very similar to the one formed by a double slit (see
Figure 27.16). A diffraction grating can be manufactured by scratching glass with a sharp tool in a number of
precisely positioned parallel lines, with the untouched regions acting like slits. These can be photographically mass
produced rather cheaply. Diffraction gratings work both for transmission of light, as inFigure 27.16, and for
reflection of light, as on butterfly wings and the Australian opal inFigure 27.17or the CD pictured in the opening
photograph of this chapter. In addition to their use as novelty items, diffraction gratings are commonly used for
spectroscopic dispersion and analysis of light. What makes them particularly useful is the fact that they form a
sharper pattern than double slits do. That is, their bright regions are narrower and brighter, while their dark regions
are darker.Figure 27.18shows idealized graphs demonstrating the sharper pattern. Natural diffraction gratings
occur in the feathers of certain birds. Tiny, finger-like structures in regular patterns act as reflection gratings,
producing constructive interference that gives the feathers colors not solely due to their pigmentation. This is called
iridescence.
FIGURE27.16A diffraction grating is a large number of evenly spaced parallel slits. (a) Light passing through is diffracted in a pattern
similar to a double slit, with bright regions at various angles. (b) The pattern obtained for white light incident on a grating. The central
maximum is white, and the higher-order maxima disperse white light into a rainbow of colors.
FIGURE27.17(a) This Australian opal and (b) the butterfly wings have rows of reflectors that act like reflection gratings, reflecting different
PAGE: 1214
1196 27 • Wave Optics
colors at different angles. (credits: (a) Opals-On-Black.com, via Flickr (b) whologwhy, Flickr)
FIGURE27.18Idealized graphs of the intensity of light passing through a double slit (a) and a diffraction grating (b) for monochromatic
light. Maxima can be produced at the same angles, but those for the diffraction grating are narrower and hence sharper. The maxima
become narrower and the regions between darker as the number of slits is increased.
The analysis of a diffraction grating is very similar to that for a double slit (seeFigure 27.19). As we know from our
discussion of double slits inYoung's Double Slit Experiment, light is diffracted by each slit and spreads out after
passing through. Rays traveling in the same direction (at an angle relative to the incident direction) are shown in
the figure. Each of these rays travels a different distance to a common point on a screen far away. The rays start in
phase, and they can be in or out of phase when they reach a screen, depending on the difference in the path lengths
traveled. As seen in the figure, each ray travels a distance different from that of its neighbor, where is the
distance between slits. If this distance equals an integral number of wavelengths, the rays all arrive in phase, and
constructive interference (a maximum) is obtained. Thus, the condition necessary to obtainconstructive
interference for a diffraction gratingis
27.11
where is the distance between slits in the grating, is the wavelength of light, and is the order of the maximum.
Note that this is exactly the same equation as for double slits separated by . However, the slits are usually closer in
diffraction gratings than in double slits, producing fewer maxima at larger angles.
FIGURE27.19Diffraction grating showing light rays from each slit traveling in the same direction. Each ray travels a different distance to
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1215
27.4 • Multiple Slit Diffraction 1197
reach a common point on a screen (not shown). Each ray travels a distance different from that of its neighbor.
Where are diffraction gratings used? Diffraction gratings are key components of monochromators used, for example,
in optical imaging of particular wavelengths from biological or medical samples. A diffraction grating can be chosen
to specifically analyze a wavelength emitted by molecules in diseased cells in a biopsy sample or to help excite
strategic molecules in the sample with a selected frequency of light. Another vital use is in optical fiber technologies
where fibers are designed to provide optimum performance at specific wavelengths. A range of diffraction gratings
are available for selecting specific wavelengths for such use.
Take-Home Experiment: Rainbows on a CD
The spacing of the grooves in a CD or DVD can be well determined by using a laser and the equation
. However, we can still make a good estimate of this spacing by using
white light and the rainbow of colors that comes from the interference. Reflect sunlight from a CD onto a wall
and use your best judgment of the location of a strongly diffracted color to find the separation .
EXAMPLE 27.3
Calculating Typical Diffraction Grating Effects
Diffraction gratings with 10,000 lines per centimeter are readily available. Suppose you have one, and you send a
beam of white light through it to a screen 2.00 m away. (a) Find the angles for the first-order diffraction of the
shortest and longest wavelengths of visible light (380 and 760 nm). (b) What is the distance between the ends of the
rainbow of visible light produced on the screen for first-order interference? (SeeFigure 27.20.)
FIGURE27.20The diffraction grating considered in this example produces a rainbow of colors on a screen a distance from the
grating. The distances along the screen are measured perpendicular to the -direction. In other words, the rainbow pattern extends out of
the page.
Strategy
The angles can be found using the equation
27.12
once a value for the slit spacing has been determined. Since there are 10,000 lines per centimeter, each line is
PAGE: 1216
1198 27 • Wave Optics
separated by of a centimeter. Once the angles are found, the distances along the screen can be found
using simple trigonometry.
Solution for (a)
The distance between slits is or . Let us call the two angles
for violet (380 nm) and for red (760 nm). Solving the equation for ,
27.13
where for first order and . Substituting these values gives
27.14
Thus the angle is
27.15
Similarly,
27.16
Thus the angle is
27.17
Notice that in both equations, we reported the results of these intermediate calculations to four significant figures to
use with the calculation in part (b).
Solution for (b)
The distances on the screen are labeled and inFigure 27.20. Noting that , we can solve for
and . That is,
27.18
and
27.19
The distance between them is therefore
27.20
Discussion
The large distance between the red and violet ends of the rainbow produced from the white light indicates the
potential this diffraction grating has as a spectroscopic tool. The more it can spread out the wavelengths (greater
dispersion), the more detail can be seen in a spectrum. This depends on the quality of the diffraction grating—it
must be very precisely made in addition to having closely spaced lines.
27.5 Single Slit Diffraction
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Discuss the single slit diffraction pattern.
Light passing through a single slit forms a diffraction pattern somewhat different from those formed by double slits
or diffraction gratings.Figure 27.21shows a single slit diffraction pattern. Note that the central maximum is larger
than those on either side, and that the intensity decreases rapidly on either side. In contrast, a diffraction grating
produces evenly spaced lines that dim slowly on either side of center.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1217
27.5 • Single Slit Diffraction 1199
FIGURE27.21(a) Single slit diffraction pattern. Monochromatic light passing through a single slit has a central maximum and many smaller
and dimmer maxima on either side. The central maximum is six times higher than shown. (b) The drawing shows the bright central
maximum and dimmer and thinner maxima on either side.
The analysis of single slit diffraction is illustrated inFigure 27.22. Here we consider light coming from different parts
of thesameslit. According to Huygens’s principle, every part of the wavefront in the slit emits wavelets. These are
like rays that start out in phase and head in all directions. (Each ray is perpendicular to the wavefront of a wavelet.)
Assuming the screen is very far away compared with the size of the slit, rays heading toward a common destination
are nearly parallel. When they travel straight ahead, as inFigure 27.22(a), they remain in phase, and a central
maximum is obtained. However, when rays travel at an angle relative to the original direction of the beam, each
travels a different distance to a common location, and they can arrive in or out of phase. InFigure 27.22(b), the ray
from the bottom travels a distance of one wavelength farther than the ray from the top. Thus a ray from the center
travels a distance farther than the one on the left, arrives out of phase, and interferes destructively. A ray from
slightly above the center and one from slightly above the bottom will also cancel one another. In fact, each ray from
the slit will have another to interfere destructively, and a minimum in intensity will occur at this angle. There will be
another minimum at the same angle to the right of the incident direction of the light.
PAGE: 1218
1200 27 • Wave Optics
FIGURE27.22Light passing through a single slit is diffracted in all directions and may interfere constructively or destructively, depending
on the angle. The difference in path length for rays from either side of the slit is seen to be .
At the larger angle shown inFigure 27.22(c), the path lengths differ by for rays from the top and bottom of the
slit. One ray travels a distance different from the ray from the bottom and arrives in phase, interfering
constructively. Two rays, each from slightly above those two, will also add constructively. Most rays from the slit will
have another to interfere with constructively, and a maximum in intensity will occur at this angle. However, all rays
do not interfere constructively for this situation, and so the maximum is not as intense as the central maximum.
Finally, inFigure 27.22(d), the angle shown is large enough to produce a second minimum. As seen in the figure, the
difference in path length for rays from either side of the slit is , and we see that a destructive minimum is
obtained when this distance is an integral multiple of the wavelength.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1219
27.5 • Single Slit Diffraction 1201
FIGURE27.23A graph of single slit diffraction intensity showing the central maximum to be wider and much more intense than those to
the sides. In fact the central maximum is six times higher than shown here.
Thus, to obtaindestructive interference for a single slit,
27.21
where is the slit width, is the light’s wavelength, is the angle relative to the original direction of the light, and
is the order of the minimum.Figure 27.23shows a graph of intensity for single slit interference, and it is apparent
that the maxima on either side of the central maximum are much less intense and not as wide. This is consistent
with the illustration inFigure 27.21(b).
EXAMPLE 27.4
Calculating Single Slit Diffraction
Visible light of wavelength 550 nm falls on a single slit and produces its second diffraction minimum at an angle of
relative to the incident direction of the light. (a) What is the width of the slit? (b) At what angle is the first
minimum produced?
FIGURE27.24A graph of the single slit diffraction pattern is analyzed in this example.
Strategy
From the given information, and assuming the screen is far away from the slit, we can use the equation
first to find , and again to find the angle for the first minimum .
Solution for (a)
We are given that , , and . Solving the equation for and substituting
known values gives
PAGE: 1220
1202 27 • Wave Optics
27.22
Solution for (b)
Solving the equation for and substituting the known values gives
27.23
Thus the angle is
27.24
Discussion
We see that the slit is narrow (it is only a few times greater than the wavelength of light). This is consistent with the
fact that light must interact with an object comparable in size to its wavelength in order to exhibit significant wave
effects such as this single slit diffraction pattern. We also see that the central maximum extends on either side
of the original beam, for a width of about . The angle between the first and second minima is only about
. Thus the second maximum is only about half as wide as the central maximum.
27.6 Limits of Resolution: The Rayleigh Criterion
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Discuss the Rayleigh criterion.
Light diffracts as it moves through space, bending around obstacles, interfering constructively and destructively.
While this can be used as a spectroscopic tool—a diffraction grating disperses light according to wavelength, for
example, and is used to produce spectra—diffraction also limits the detail we can obtain in images.Figure 27.25(a)
shows the effect of passing light through a small circular aperture. Instead of a bright spot with sharp edges, a spot
with a fuzzy edge surrounded by circles of light is obtained. This pattern is caused by diffraction similar to that
produced by a single slit. Light from different parts of the circular aperture interferes constructively and
destructively. The effect is most noticeable when the aperture is small, but the effect is there for large apertures,
too.
FIGURE27.25(a) Monochromatic light passed through a small circular aperture produces this diffraction pattern. (b) Two point light
sources that are close to one another produce overlapping images because of diffraction. (c) If they are closer together, they cannot be
resolved or distinguished.
How does diffraction affect the detail that can be observed when light passes through an aperture?Figure 27.25(b)
shows the diffraction pattern produced by two point light sources that are close to one another. The pattern is
similar to that for a single point source, and it is just barely possible to tell that there are two light sources rather
than one. If they were closer together, as inFigure 27.25(c), we could not distinguish them, thus limiting the detail
or resolution we can obtain. This limit is an inescapable consequence of the wave nature of light.
There are many situations in which diffraction limits the resolution. The acuity of our vision is limited because light
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1221
27.6 • Limits of Resolution: The Rayleigh Criterion 1203
passes through the pupil, the circular aperture of our eye. Be aware that the diffraction-like spreading of light is due
to the limited diameter of a light beam, not the interaction with an aperture. Thus light passing through a lens with a
diameter shows this effect and spreads, blurring the image, just as light passing through an aperture of diameter
does. So diffraction limits the resolution of any system having a lens or mirror. Telescopes are also limited by
diffraction, because of the finite diameter of their primary mirror.
Take-Home Experiment: Resolution of the Eye
Draw two lines on a white sheet of paper (several mm apart). How far away can you be and still distinguish the
two lines? What does this tell you about the size of the eye’s pupil? Can you be quantitative? (The size of an
adult’s pupil is discussed inPhysics of the Eye.)
Just what is the limit? To answer that question, consider the diffraction pattern for a circular aperture, which has a
central maximum that is wider and brighter than the maxima surrounding it (similar to a slit) [seeFigure 27.26(a)]. It
can be shown that, for a circular aperture of diameter , the first minimum in the diffraction pattern occurs at
(providing the aperture is large compared with the wavelength of light, which is the case for most
optical instruments). The accepted criterion for determining the diffraction limit to resolution based on this angle
was developed by Lord Rayleigh in the 19th century. TheRayleigh criterionfor the diffraction limit to resolution
states thattwo images are just resolvable when the center of the diffraction pattern of one is directly over the first
minimum of the diffraction pattern of the other. SeeFigure 27.26(b). The first minimum is at an angle of
, so that two point objects are just resolvable if they are separated by the angle
27.25
where is the wavelength of light (or other electromagnetic radiation) and is the diameter of the aperture, lens,
mirror, etc., with which the two objects are observed. In this expression, has units of radians.
FIGURE27.26(a) Graph of intensity of the diffraction pattern for a circular aperture. Note that, similar to a single slit, the central maximum
is wider and brighter than those to the sides. (b) Two point objects produce overlapping diffraction patterns. Shown here is the Rayleigh
criterion for being just resolvable. The central maximum of one pattern lies on the first minimum of the other.
Connections: Limits to Knowledge
All attempts to observe the size and shape of objects are limited by the wavelength of the probe. Even the small
wavelength of light prohibits exact precision. When extremely small wavelength probes as with an electron
microscope are used, the system is disturbed, still limiting our knowledge, much as making an electrical
measurement alters a circuit. Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle asserts that this limit is fundamental and
PAGE: 1222
1204 27 • Wave Optics
inescapable, as we shall see in quantum mechanics.
EXAMPLE 27.5
Calculating Diffraction Limits of the Hubble Space Telescope
The primary mirror of the orbiting Hubble Space Telescope has a diameter of 2.40 m. Being in orbit, this telescope
avoids the degrading effects of atmospheric distortion on its resolution. (a) What is the angle between two just-
resolvable point light sources (perhaps two stars)? Assume an average light wavelength of 550 nm. (b) If these two
stars are at the 2 million light year distance of the Andromeda galaxy, how close together can they be and still be
resolved? (A light year, or ly, is the distance light travels in 1 year.)
Strategy
The Rayleigh criterion stated in the equation gives the smallest possible angle between point sources,
or the best obtainable resolution. Once this angle is found, the distance between stars can be calculated, since we
are given how far away they are.
Solution for (a)
The Rayleigh criterion for the minimum resolvable angle is
27.26
Entering known values gives
27.27
Solution for (b)
The distance between two objects a distance away and separated by an angle is .
Substituting known values gives
27.28
Discussion
The angle found in part (a) is extraordinarily small (less than 1/50,000 of a degree), because the primary mirror is so
large compared with the wavelength of light. As noticed, diffraction effects are most noticeable when light interacts
with objects having sizes on the order of the wavelength of light. However, the effect is still there, and there is a
diffraction limit to what is observable. The actual resolution of the Hubble Telescope is not quite as good as that
found here. As with all instruments, there are other effects, such as non-uniformities in mirrors or aberrations in
lenses that further limit resolution. However,Figure 27.27gives an indication of the extent of the detail observable
with the Hubble because of its size and quality and especially because it is above the Earth’s atmosphere.
FIGURE27.27These two photographs of the M82 galaxy give an idea of the observable detail using the Hubble Space Telescope compared
with that using a ground-based telescope. (a) On the left is a ground-based image. (credit: Ricnun, Wikimedia Commons) (b) The photo on
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1223
27.6 • Limits of Resolution: The Rayleigh Criterion 1205
the right was captured by Hubble. (credit: NASA, ESA, and the Hubble Heritage Team (STScI/AURA))
The answer in part (b) indicates that two stars separated by about half a light year can be resolved. The average
distance between stars in a galaxy is on the order of 5 light years in the outer parts and about 1 light year near the
galactic center. Therefore, the Hubble can resolve most of the individual stars in Andromeda galaxy, even though it
lies at such a huge distance that its light takes 2 million years for its light to reach us.Figure 27.28shows another
mirror used to observe radio waves from outer space.
FIGURE27.28A 305-m-diameter natural bowl at Arecibo in Puerto Rico is lined with reflective material, making it into a radio telescope. It
is the largest curved focusing dish in the world. Although for Arecibo is much larger than for the Hubble Telescope, it detects much longer
wavelength radiation and its diffraction limit is significantly poorer than Hubble’s. Arecibo is still very useful, because important information
is carried by radio waves that is not carried by visible light. (credit: Tatyana Temirbulatova, Flickr)
Diffraction is not only a problem for optical instruments but also for the electromagnetic radiation itself. Any beam
of light having a finite diameter and a wavelength exhibits diffraction spreading. The beam spreads out with an
angle given by the equation . Take, for example, a laser beam made of rays as parallel as possible
(angles between rays as close to as possible) instead spreads out at an angle , where is the
diameter of the beam and is its wavelength. This spreading is impossible to observe for a flashlight, because its
beam is not very parallel to start with. However, for long-distance transmission of laser beams or microwave signals,
diffraction spreading can be significant (seeFigure 27.29). To avoid this, we can increase . This is done for laser
light sent to the Moon to measure its distance from the Earth. The laser beam is expanded through a telescope to
make much larger and smaller.
FIGURE27.29The beam produced by this microwave transmission antenna will spread out at a minimum angle due to
diffraction. It is impossible to produce a near-parallel beam, because the beam has a limited diameter.
In most biology laboratories, resolution is presented when the use of the microscope is introduced. The ability of a
lens to produce sharp images of two closely spaced point objects is called resolution. The smaller the distance by
which two objects can be separated and still be seen as distinct, the greater the resolution. The resolving power of a
lens is defined as that distance . An expression for resolving power is obtained from the Rayleigh criterion. In
Figure 27.30(a) we have two point objects separated by a distance . According to the Rayleigh criterion, resolution
is possible when the minimum angular separation is
27.29
where is the distance between the specimen and the objective lens, and we have used the small angle
PAGE: 1224
1206 27 • Wave Optics
approximation (i.e., we have assumed that is much smaller than ), so that .
Therefore, the resolving power is
27.30
Another way to look at this is by re-examining the concept of Numerical Aperture ( ) discussed inMicroscopes.
There, is a measure of the maximum acceptance angle at which the fiber will take light and still contain it within
the fiber.Figure 27.30(b) shows a lens and an object at point P. The here is a measure of the ability of the lens
to gather light and resolve fine detail. The angle subtended by the lens at its focus is defined to be . From the
figure and again using the small angle approximation, we can write
27.31
The for a lens is , where is the index of refraction of the medium between the objective lens and
the object at point P.
From this definition for , we can see that
27.32
In a microscope, is important because it relates to the resolving power of a lens. A lens with a large will be
able to resolve finer details. Lenses with larger will also be able to collect more light and so give a brighter
image. Another way to describe this situation is that the larger the , the larger the cone of light that can be
brought into the lens, and so more of the diffraction modes will be collected. Thus the microscope has more
information to form a clear image, and so its resolving power will be higher.
FIGURE27.30(a) Two points separated by at distance and a positioned a distance away from the objective. (credit: Infopro, Wikimedia
Commons) (b) Terms and symbols used in discussion of resolving power for a lens and an object at point P. (credit: Infopro, Wikimedia
Commons)
One of the consequences of diffraction is that the focal point of a beam has a finite width and intensity distribution.
Consider focusing when only considering geometric optics, shown inFigure 27.31(a). The focal point is infinitely
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1225
27.7 • Thin Film Interference 1207
small with a huge intensity and the capacity to incinerate most samples irrespective of the of the objective lens.
For wave optics, due to diffraction, the focal point spreads to become a focal spot (seeFigure 27.31(b)) with the size
of the spot decreasing with increasing . Consequently, the intensity in the focal spot increases with increasing
. The higher the , the greater the chances of photodegrading the specimen. However, the spot never
becomes a true point.
FIGURE27.31(a) In geometric optics, the focus is a point, but it is not physically possible to produce such a point because it implies
infinite intensity. (b) In wave optics, the focus is an extended region.
27.7 Thin Film Interference
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Discuss the rainbow formation by thin films.
The bright colors seen in an oil slick floating on water or in a sunlit soap bubble are caused by interference. The
brightest colors are those that interfere constructively. This interference is between light reflected from different
surfaces of a thin film; thus, the effect is known asthin film interference. As noticed before, interference effects are
most prominent when light interacts with something having a size similar to its wavelength. A thin film is one having
a thickness smaller than a few times the wavelength of light, . Since color is associated indirectly with and since
all interference depends in some way on the ratio of to the size of the object involved, we should expect to see
different colors for different thicknesses of a film, as inFigure 27.32. Some of the earliest measurements of such
films and their effects were conducted by Agnes Pockels, a self-taught German chemist who investigated the
characteristics of soapy and greasy films in water. Using homemade materials, Pockels developed a trough for
measuring surface films and began conducting experiments. While scientific and societal barriers for women
prevented her from publishing on her own, renowned scientist Lord Rayleigh supported her efforts and pushed for
her work to be shared in the journalNature. The trough Pockels invented became the basis for the contemporary
version, as described below.
PAGE: 1226
1208 27 • Wave Optics
FIGURE27.32These soap bubbles exhibit brilliant colors when exposed to sunlight. (credit: Scott Robinson, Flickr)
What causes thin film interference?Figure 27.33shows how light reflected from the top and bottom surfaces of a
film can interfere. Incident light is only partially reflected from the top surface of the film (ray 1). The remainder
enters the film and is itself partially reflected from the bottom surface. Part of the light reflected from the bottom
surface can emerge from the top of the film (ray 2) and interfere with light reflected from the top (ray 1). Since the
ray that enters the film travels a greater distance, it may be in or out of phase with the ray reflected from the top.
However, consider for a moment, again, the bubbles inFigure 27.32. The bubbles are darkest where they are
thinnest. Furthermore, if you observe a soap bubble carefully, you will note it gets dark at the point where it breaks.
For very thin films, the difference in path lengths of ray 1 and ray 2 inFigure 27.33is negligible; so why should they
interfere destructively and not constructively? The answer is that a phase change can occur upon reflection. The rule
is as follows:
When light reflects from a medium having an index of refraction greater than that of the medium in which it is
traveling, a phase change (or a shift) occurs.
FIGURE27.33Light striking a thin film is partially reflected (ray 1) and partially refracted at the top surface. The refracted ray is partially
reflected at the bottom surface and emerges as ray 2. These rays will interfere in a way that depends on the thickness of the film and the
indices of refraction of the various media.
If the film inFigure 27.33is a soap bubble (essentially water with air on both sides), then there is a shift for ray
1 and none for ray 2. Thus, when the film is very thin, the path length difference between the two rays is negligible,
they are exactly out of phase, and destructive interference will occur at all wavelengths and so the soap bubble will
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1227
27.7 • Thin Film Interference 1209
be dark here.
The thickness of the film relative to the wavelength of light is the other crucial factor in thin film interference. Ray 2
inFigure 27.33travels a greater distance than ray 1. For light incident perpendicular to the surface, ray 2 travels a
distance approximately farther than ray 1. When this distance is an integral or half-integral multiple of the
wavelength in the medium ( , where is the wavelength in vacuum and is the index of refraction),
constructive or destructive interference occurs, depending also on whether there is a phase change in either ray.
Thin-film interference has created an entire field of research and industrial applications. Its foundations were laid by
Irving Langmuir and Katharine Burr Blodgett, working at General Electric in the 1920s and 1930s. Langmuir had
pioneered a method for producing ultra-thin layers on materials. Blodgett built on these practices by creating a
method to precisely stack and compress these layers in order to produce a film of a desired thickness and quality.
The device they developed became known as the Langmuir-Blodgett trough, built from principles developed by
Agnes Pockels and still used in laboratories today. The earliest widely applied use of these principles was non-
reflective glass, which Blodgett patented in 1938 and which was used almost immediately in the making of the film
Gone With the Wind. The film is viewed as a tremendous leap in cinematography; cameras, microscopes,
telescopes, and many other instruments rely on Blodgett's invention as well.
EXAMPLE 27.6
Calculating Non-reflective Lens Coating Using Thin Film Interference
Sophisticated cameras use a series of several lenses. Light can reflect from the surfaces of these various lenses and
degrade image clarity. To limit these reflections, lenses are coated with a thin layer of magnesium fluoride that
causes destructive thin film interference. What is the thinnest this film can be, if its index of refraction is 1.38 and it
is designed to limit the reflection of 550-nm light, normally the most intense visible wavelength? The index of
refraction of glass is 1.52.
Strategy
Refer toFigure 27.33and use for air, , and . Both ray 1 and ray 2 will have a shift
upon reflection. Thus, to obtain destructive interference, ray 2 will need to travel a half wavelength farther than ray
1. For rays incident perpendicularly, the path length difference is .
Solution
To obtain destructive interference here,
27.33
where is the wavelength in the film and is given by .
Thus,
27.34
Solving for and entering known values yields
27.35
Discussion
Films such as the one in this example are most effective in producing destructive interference when the thinnest
layer is used, since light over a broader range of incident angles will be reduced in intensity. These films are called
non-reflective coatings; this is only an approximately correct description, though, since other wavelengths will only
be partially cancelled. Non-reflective coatings are used in car windows and sunglasses.
PAGE: 1228
1210 27 • Wave Optics
Thin film interference is most constructive or most destructive when the path length difference for the two rays is an
integral or half-integral wavelength, respectively. That is, for rays incident perpendicularly, or
. To know whether interference is constructive or destructive, you must also determine
if there is a phase change upon reflection. Thin film interference thus depends on film thickness, the wavelength of
light, and the refractive indices. For white light incident on a film that varies in thickness, you will observe rainbow
colors of constructive interference for various wavelengths as the thickness varies.
EXAMPLE 27.7
Soap Bubbles: More Than One Thickness can be Constructive
(a) What are the three smallest thicknesses of a soap bubble that produce constructive interference for red light
with a wavelength of 650 nm? The index of refraction of soap is taken to be the same as that of water. (b) What three
smallest thicknesses will give destructive interference?
Strategy and Concept
UseFigure 27.33to visualize the bubble. Note that for air, and for soap (equivalent to
water). There is a shift for ray 1 reflected from the top surface of the bubble, and no shift for ray 2 reflected from
the bottom surface. To get constructive interference, then, the path length difference ( ) must be a half-integral
multiple of the wavelength—the first three being , and . To get destructive interference, the path
length difference must be an integral multiple of the wavelength—the first three being , and .
Solution for (a)
Constructive interferenceoccurs here when
27.36
The smallest constructive thickness thus is
27.37
The next thickness that gives constructive interference is , so that
27.38
Finally, the third thickness producing constructive interference is , so that
27.39
Solution for (b)
Fordestructive interference, the path length difference here is an integral multiple of the wavelength. The first
occurs for zero thickness, since there is a phase change at the top surface. That is,
27.40
The first non-zero thickness producing destructive interference is
27.41
Substituting known values gives
27.42
Finally, the third destructive thickness is , so that
27.43
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1229
27.7 • Thin Film Interference 1211
Discussion
If the bubble was illuminated with pure red light, we would see bright and dark bands at very uniform increases in
thickness. First would be a dark band at 0 thickness, then bright at 122 nm thickness, then dark at 244 nm, bright at
366 nm, dark at 488 nm, and bright at 610 nm. If the bubble varied smoothly in thickness, like a smooth wedge,
then the bands would be evenly spaced.
Another example of thin film interference can be seen when microscope slides are separated (seeFigure 27.34).
The slides are very flat, so that the wedge of air between them increases in thickness very uniformly. A phase
change occurs at the second surface but not the first, and so there is a dark band where the slides touch. The
rainbow colors of constructive interference repeat, going from violet to red again and again as the distance between
the slides increases. As the layer of air increases, the bands become more difficult to see, because slight changes in
incident angle have greater effects on path length differences. If pure-wavelength light instead of white light is used,
then bright and dark bands are obtained rather than repeating rainbow colors.
FIGURE27.34(a) The rainbow color bands are produced by thin film interference in the air between the two glass slides. (b) Schematic of
the paths taken by rays in the wedge of air between the slides.
An important application of thin film interference is found in the manufacturing of optical instruments. A lens or
mirror can be compared with a master as it is being ground, allowing it to be shaped to an accuracy of less than a
wavelength over its entire surface.Figure 27.35illustrates the phenomenon called Newton’s rings, which occurs
when the plane surfaces of two lenses are placed together. (The circular bands are called Newton’s rings because
Isaac Newton described them and their use in detail. Newton did not discover them; Robert Hooke did, and Newton
did not believe they were due to the wave character of light.) Each successive ring of a given color indicates an
increase of only one wavelength in the distance between the lens and the blank, so that great precision can be
obtained. Once the lens is perfect, there will be no rings.
FIGURE27.35“Newton's rings” interference fringes are produced when two plano-convex lenses are placed together with their plane
surfaces in contact. The rings are created by interference between the light reflected off the two surfaces as a result of a slight gap between
them, indicating that these surfaces are not precisely plane but are slightly convex. (credit: Ulf Seifert, Wikimedia Commons)
The wings of certain moths and butterflies have nearly iridescent colors due to thin film interference. In addition to
pigmentation, the wing’s color is affected greatly by constructive interference of certain wavelengths reflected from
its film-coated surface. Car manufacturers are offering special paint jobs that use thin film interference to produce
colors that change with angle. This expensive option is based on variation of thin film path length differences with
angle. Security features on credit cards, banknotes, driving licenses and similar items prone to forgery use thin film
interference, diffraction gratings, or holograms. Australia led the way with dollar bills printed on polymer with a
PAGE: 1230
1212 27 • Wave Optics
diffraction grating security feature making the currency difficult to forge. Other countries such as New Zealand and
Taiwan are using similar technologies, while the United States currency includes a thin film interference effect.
Making Connections: Take-Home Experiment—Thin Film Interference
One feature of thin film interference and diffraction gratings is that the pattern shifts as you change the angle at
which you look or move your head. Find examples of thin film interference and gratings around you. Explain how
the patterns change for each specific example. Find examples where the thickness changes giving rise to
changing colors. If you can find two microscope slides, then try observing the effect shown inFigure 27.34. Try
separating one end of the two slides with a hair or maybe a thin piece of paper and observe the effect.
Problem-Solving Strategies for Wave Optics
Step 1.Examine the situation to determine that interference is involved. Identify whether slits or thin film
interference are considered in the problem.
Step 2.If slits are involved, note that diffraction gratings and double slits produce very similar interference patterns,
but that gratings have narrower (sharper) maxima. Single slit patterns are characterized by a large central maximum
and smaller maxima to the sides.
Step 3.If thin film interference is involved, take note of the path length difference between the two rays that
interfere. Be certain to use the wavelength in the medium involved, since it differs from the wavelength in vacuum.
Note also that there is an additional phase shift when light reflects from a medium with a greater index of
refraction.
Step 4.Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem (identify the unknowns). A written list is useful.
Draw a diagram of the situation. Labeling the diagram is useful.
Step 5.Make a list of what is given or can be inferred from the problem as stated (identify the knowns).
Step 6.Solve the appropriate equation for the quantity to be determined (the unknown), and enter the knowns.
Slits, gratings, and the Rayleigh limit involve equations.
Step 7.For thin film interference, you will have constructive interference for a total shift that is an integral number
of wavelengths. You will have destructive interference for a total shift of a half-integral number of wavelengths.
Always keep in mind that crest to crest is constructive whereas crest to trough is destructive.
Step 8.Check to see if the answer is reasonable: Does it make sense?Angles in interference patterns cannot be
greater than , for example.
27.8 Polarization
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Discuss the meaning of polarization.
• Discuss the property of optical activity of certain materials.
Polaroid sunglasses are familiar to most of us. They have a special ability to cut the glare of light reflected from
water or glass (seeFigure 27.36). Polaroids have this ability because of a wave characteristic of light called
polarization. What is polarization? How is it produced? What are some of its uses? The answers to these questions
are related to the wave character of light.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1231
27.8 • Polarization 1213
FIGURE27.36These two photographs of a river show the effect of a polarizing filter in reducing glare in light reflected from the surface of
water. Part (b) of this figure was taken with a polarizing filter and part (a) was not. As a result, the reflection of clouds and sky observed in
part (a) is not observed in part (b). Polarizing sunglasses are particularly useful on snow and water. (credit: Amithshs, Wikimedia Commons)
Light is one type of electromagnetic (EM) wave. As noted earlier, EM waves aretransverse wavesconsisting of
varying electric and magnetic fields that oscillate perpendicular to the direction of propagation (seeFigure 27.37).
There are specific directions for the oscillations of the electric and magnetic fields.Polarizationis the attribute that
a wave’s oscillations have a definite direction relative to the direction of propagation of the wave. (This is not the
same type of polarization as that discussed for the separation of charges.) Waves having such a direction are said to
bepolarized. For an EM wave, we define thedirection of polarizationto be the direction parallel to the electric
field. Thus we can think of the electric field arrows as showing the direction of polarization, as inFigure 27.37.
FIGURE27.37An EM wave, such as light, is a transverse wave. The electric and magnetic fields are perpendicular to the direction of
propagation.
To examine this further, consider the transverse waves in the ropes shown inFigure 27.38. The oscillations in one
rope are in a vertical plane and are said to bevertically polarized. Those in the other rope are in a horizontal plane
and arehorizontally polarized. If a vertical slit is placed on the first rope, the waves pass through. However, a
vertical slit blocks the horizontally polarized waves. For EM waves, the direction of the electric field is analogous to
the disturbances on the ropes.
FIGURE27.38The transverse oscillations in one rope are in a vertical plane, and those in the other rope are in a horizontal plane. The first
is said to be vertically polarized, and the other is said to be horizontally polarized. Vertical slits pass vertically polarized waves and block
horizontally polarized waves.
The Sun and many other light sources produce waves that are randomly polarized (seeFigure 27.39). Such light is
said to beunpolarizedbecause it is composed of many waves with all possible directions of polarization. Polaroid
PAGE: 1232
1214 27 • Wave Optics
materials, invented by the founder of Polaroid Corporation, Edwin Land, act as apolarizingslit for light, allowing only
polarization in one direction to pass through. Polarizing filters are composed of long molecules aligned in one
direction. Thinking of the molecules as many slits, analogous to those for the oscillating ropes, we can understand
why only light with a specific polarization can get through. Theaxis of a polarizing filteris the direction along which
the filter passes the electric field of an EM wave (seeFigure 27.40).
FIGURE27.39The slender arrow represents a ray of unpolarized light. The bold arrows represent the direction of polarization of the
individual waves composing the ray. Since the light is unpolarized, the arrows point in all directions.
FIGURE27.40A polarizing filter has a polarization axis that acts as a slit passing through electric fields parallel to its direction. The
direction of polarization of an EM wave is defined to be the direction of its electric field.
Figure 27.41shows the effect of two polarizing filters on originally unpolarized light. The first filter polarizes the light
along its axis. When the axes of the first and second filters are aligned (parallel), then all of the polarized light
passed by the first filter is also passed by the second. If the second polarizing filter is rotated, only the component of
the light parallel to the second filter’s axis is passed. When the axes are perpendicular, no light is passed by the
second.
Only the component of the EM wave parallel to the axis of a filter is passed. Let us call the angle between the
direction of polarization and the axis of a filter . If the electric field has an amplitude , then the transmitted part of
the wave has an amplitude (seeFigure 27.42). Since the intensity of a wave is proportional to its amplitude
squared, the intensity of the transmitted wave is related to the incident wave by
27.44
where is the intensity of the polarized wave before passing through the filter. (The above equation is known as
Malus’s law.)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1233
27.8 • Polarization 1215
FIGURE27.41The effect of rotating two polarizing filters, where the first polarizes the light. (a) All of the polarized light is passed by the
second polarizing filter, because its axis is parallel to the first. (b) As the second is rotated, only part of the light is passed. (c) When the
second is perpendicular to the first, no light is passed. (d) In this photograph, a polarizing filter is placed above two others. Its axis is
perpendicular to the filter on the right (dark area) and parallel to the filter on the left (lighter area). (credit: P.P. Urone)
FIGURE27.42A polarizing filter transmits only the component of the wave parallel to its axis, , reducing the intensity of any light
not polarized parallel to its axis.
EXAMPLE 27.8
Calculating Intensity Reduction by a Polarizing Filter
What angle is needed between the direction of polarized light and the axis of a polarizing filter to reduce its intensity
by ?
Strategy
When the intensity is reduced by , it is or 0.100 times its original value. That is, . Using this
information, the equation can be used to solve for the needed angle.
Solution
Solving the equation for and substituting with the relationship between and gives
27.45
Solving for yields
27.46
PAGE: 1234
1216 27 • Wave Optics
Discussion
A fairly large angle between the direction of polarization and the filter axis is needed to reduce the intensity to
of its original value. This seems reasonable based on experimenting with polarizing films. It is interesting
that, at an angle of , the intensity is reduced to of its original value (as you will show in this section’s
Problems & Exercises). Note that is from reducing the intensity to zero, and that at an angle of the
intensity is reduced to of its original value (as you will also show in Problems & Exercises), giving evidence of
symmetry.
Polarization by Reflection
By now you can probably guess that Polaroid sunglasses cut the glare in reflected light because that light is
polarized. You can check this for yourself by holding Polaroid sunglasses in front of you and rotating them while
looking at light reflected from water or glass. As you rotate the sunglasses, you will notice the light gets bright and
dim, but not completely black. This implies the reflected light is partially polarized and cannot be completely
blocked by a polarizing filter.
Figure 27.43illustrates what happens when unpolarized light is reflected from a surface. Vertically polarized light is
preferentially refracted at the surface, so thatthe reflected light is left more horizontally polarized. The reasons for
this phenomenon are beyond the scope of this text, but a convenient mnemonic for remembering this is to imagine
the polarization direction to be like an arrow. Vertical polarization would be like an arrow perpendicular to the
surface and would be more likely to stick and not be reflected. Horizontal polarization is like an arrow bouncing on
its side and would be more likely to be reflected. Sunglasses with vertical axes would then block more reflected light
than unpolarized light from other sources.
FIGURE27.43Polarization by reflection. Unpolarized light has equal amounts of vertical and horizontal polarization. After interaction with a
surface, the vertical components are preferentially absorbed or refracted, leaving the reflected light more horizontally polarized. This is akin
to arrows striking on their sides bouncing off, whereas arrows striking on their tips go into the surface.
Since the part of the light that is not reflected is refracted, the amount of polarization depends on the indices of
refraction of the media involved. It can be shown thatreflected light is completely polarizedat a angle of
reflection , given by
27.47
where is the medium in which the incident and reflected light travel and is the index of refraction of the
medium that forms the interface that reflects the light. This equation is known asBrewster’s law, and is known
asBrewster’s angle, named after the 19th-century Scottish physicist who discovered them.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1235
27.8 • Polarization 1217
Things Great and Small: Atomic Explanation of Polarizing Filters
Polarizing filters have a polarization axis that acts as a slit. This slit passes electromagnetic waves (often visible
light) that have an electric field parallel to the axis. This is accomplished with long molecules aligned
perpendicular to the axis as shown inFigure 27.44.
FIGURE27.44Long molecules are aligned perpendicular to the axis of a polarizing filter. The component of the electric field in an EM
wave perpendicular to these molecules passes through the filter, while the component parallel to the molecules is absorbed.
Figure 27.45illustrates how the component of the electric field parallel to the long molecules is absorbed. An
electromagnetic wave is composed of oscillating electric and magnetic fields. The electric field is strong
compared with the magnetic field and is more effective in exerting force on charges in the molecules. The most
affected charged particles are the electrons in the molecules, since electron masses are small. If the electron is
forced to oscillate, it can absorb energy from the EM wave. This reduces the fields in the wave and, hence,
reduces its intensity. In long molecules, electrons can more easily oscillate parallel to the molecule than in the
perpendicular direction. The electrons are bound to the molecule and are more restricted in their movement
perpendicular to the molecule. Thus, the electrons can absorb EM waves that have a component of their electric
field parallel to the molecule. The electrons are much less responsive to electric fields perpendicular to the
molecule and will allow those fields to pass. Thus the axis of the polarizing filter is perpendicular to the length of
the molecule.
PAGE: 1236
1218 27 • Wave Optics
FIGURE27.45Artist’s conception of an electron in a long molecule oscillating parallel to the molecule. The oscillation of the electron
absorbs energy and reduces the intensity of the component of the EM wave that is parallel to the molecule.
EXAMPLE 27.9
Calculating Polarization by Reflection
(a) At what angle will light traveling in air be completely polarized horizontally when reflected from water? (b) From
glass?
Strategy
All we need to solve these problems are the indices of refraction. Air has water has and
crown glass has . The equation can be directly applied to find in each case.
Solution for (a)
Putting the known quantities into the equation
27.48
gives
27.49
Solving for the angle yields
27.50
Solution for (b)
Similarly, for crown glass and air,
27.51
Thus,
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1237
27.8 • Polarization 1219
27.52
Discussion
Light reflected at these angles could be completely blocked by a good polarizing filter held with itsaxis vertical.
Brewster’s angle for water and air are similar to those for glass and air, so that sunglasses are equally effective for
light reflected from either water or glass under similar circumstances. Light not reflected is refracted into these
media. So at an incident angle equal to Brewster’s angle, the refracted light will be slightly polarized vertically. It will
not be completely polarized vertically, because only a small fraction of the incident light is reflected, and so a
significant amount of horizontally polarized light is refracted.
Polarization by Scattering
If you hold your Polaroid sunglasses in front of you and rotate them while looking at blue sky, you will see the sky
get bright and dim. This is a clear indication that light scattered by air is partially polarized.Figure 27.46helps
illustrate how this happens. Since light is a transverse EM wave, it vibrates the electrons of air molecules
perpendicular to the direction it is traveling. The electrons then radiate like small antennae. Since they are
oscillating perpendicular to the direction of the light ray, they produce EM radiation that is polarized perpendicular
to the direction of the ray. When viewing the light along a line perpendicular to the original ray, as inFigure 27.46,
there can be no polarization in the scattered light parallel to the original ray, because that would require the original
ray to be a longitudinal wave. Along other directions, a component of the other polarization can be projected along
the line of sight, and the scattered light will only be partially polarized. Furthermore, multiple scattering can bring
light to your eyes from other directions and can contain different polarizations.
FIGURE27.46Polarization by scattering. Unpolarized light scattering from air molecules shakes their electrons perpendicular to the
direction of the original ray. The scattered light therefore has a polarization perpendicular to the original direction and none parallel to the
original direction.
Photographs of the sky can be darkened by polarizing filters, a trick used by many photographers to make clouds
brighter by contrast. Scattering from other particles, such as smoke or dust, can also polarize light. Detecting
polarization in scattered EM waves can be a useful analytical tool in determining the scattering source.
There is a range of optical effects used in sunglasses. Besides being Polaroid, other sunglasses have colored
pigments embedded in them, while others use non-reflective or even reflective coatings. A recent development is
photochromic lenses, which darken in the sunlight and become clear indoors. Photochromic lenses are embedded
with organic microcrystalline molecules that change their properties when exposed to UV in sunlight, but become
clear in artificial lighting with no UV.
PAGE: 1238
1220 27 • Wave Optics
Take-Home Experiment: Polarization
Find Polaroid sunglasses and rotate one while holding the other still and look at different surfaces and objects.
Explain your observations. What is the difference in angle from when you see a maximum intensity to when you
see a minimum intensity? Find a reflective glass surface and do the same. At what angle does the glass need to
be oriented to give minimum glare?
Liquid Crystals and Other Polarization Effects in Materials
While you are undoubtedly aware of liquid crystal displays (LCDs) found in watches, calculators, computer screens,
cellphones, flat screen televisions, and other myriad places, you may not be aware that they are based on
polarization. Liquid crystals are so named because their molecules can be aligned even though they are in a liquid.
Liquid crystals have the property that they can rotate the polarization of light passing through them by .
Furthermore, this property can be turned off by the application of a voltage, as illustrated inFigure 27.47. It is
possible to manipulate this characteristic quickly and in small well-defined regions to create the contrast patterns
we see in so many LCD devices.
In flat screen LCD televisions, there is a large light at the back of the TV. The light travels to the front screen through
millions of tiny units called pixels (picture elements). One of these is shown inFigure 27.47(a) and (b). Each unit has
three cells, with red, blue, or green filters, each controlled independently. When the voltage across a liquid crystal is
switched off, the liquid crystal passes the light through the particular filter. One can vary the picture contrast by
varying the strength of the voltage applied to the liquid crystal.
FIGURE27.47(a) Polarized light is rotated by a liquid crystal and then passed by a polarizing filter that has its axis perpendicular to the
original polarization direction. (b) When a voltage is applied to the liquid crystal, the polarized light is not rotated and is blocked by the filter,
making the region dark in comparison with its surroundings. (c) LCDs can be made color specific, small, and fast enough to use in computer
monitor screens. (credit: Idaho National Laboratory)
Many crystals and solutions rotate the plane of polarization of light passing through them. Such substances are said
to beoptically active. Examples include sugar water, insulin, and collagen (seeFigure 27.48). In addition to
depending on the type of substance, the amount and direction of rotation depends on a number of factors. Among
these is the concentration of the substance, the distance the light travels through it, and the wavelength of light.
Optical activity is due to the asymmetric shape of molecules in the substance, such as being helical. Measurements
of the rotation of polarized light passing through substances can thus be used to measure concentrations, a
standard technique for sugars. It can also give information on the shapes of molecules, such as proteins, and factors
that affect their shapes, such as temperature and pH.
FIGURE27.48Optical activity is the ability of some substances to rotate the plane of polarization of light passing through them. The
rotation is detected with a polarizing filter or analyzer.
Glass and plastic become optically active when stressed; the greater the stress, the greater the effect. Optical stress
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1239
27.9 • *Extended Topic* Microscopy Enhanced by the Wave Characteristics of Light 1221
analysis on complicated shapes can be performed by making plastic models of them and observing them through
crossed filters, as seen inFigure 27.49. It is apparent that the effect depends on wavelength as well as stress. The
wavelength dependence is sometimes also used for artistic purposes.
FIGURE27.49Optical stress analysis of a plastic lens placed between crossed polarizers. (credit: Infopro, Wikimedia Commons)
Another interesting phenomenon associated with polarized light is the ability of some crystals to split an
unpolarized beam of light into two. Such crystals are said to bebirefringent(seeFigure 27.50). Each of the
separated rays has a specific polarization. One behaves normally and is called the ordinary ray, whereas the other
does not obey Snell’s law and is called the extraordinary ray. Birefringent crystals can be used to produce polarized
beams from unpolarized light. Some birefringent materials preferentially absorb one of the polarizations. These
materials are called dichroic and can produce polarization by this preferential absorption. This is fundamentally how
polarizing filters and other polarizers work. The interested reader is invited to further pursue the numerous
properties of materials related to polarization.
FIGURE27.50Birefringent materials, such as the common mineral calcite, split unpolarized beams of light into two. The ordinary ray
behaves as expected, but the extraordinary ray does not obey Snell’s law.
27.9 *Extended Topic* Microscopy Enhanced by the Wave Characteristics of
Light
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Discuss the different types of microscopes.
Physics research underpins the advancement of developments in microscopy. As we gain knowledge of the wave
nature of electromagnetic waves and methods to analyze and interpret signals, new microscopes that enable us to
“see” more are being developed. It is the evolution and newer generation of microscopes that are described in this
section.
The use of microscopes (microscopy) to observe small details is limited by the wave nature of light. Owing to the
fact that light diffracts significantly around small objects, it becomes impossible to observe details significantly
smaller than the wavelength of light. One rule of thumb has it that all details smaller than about are difficult to
observe. Radar, for example, can detect the size of an aircraft, but not its individual rivets, since the wavelength of
most radar is several centimeters or greater. Similarly, visible light cannot detect individual atoms, since atoms are
PAGE: 1240
1222 27 • Wave Optics
about 0.1 nm in size and visible wavelengths range from 380 to 760 nm. Ironically, special techniques used to
obtain the best possible resolution with microscopes take advantage of the same wave characteristics of light that
ultimately limit the detail.
Making Connections: Waves
All attempts to observe the size and shape of objects are limited by the wavelength of the probe. Sonar and
medical ultrasound are limited by the wavelength of sound they employ. We shall see that this is also true in
electron microscopy, since electrons have a wavelength. Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle asserts that this
limit is fundamental and inescapable, as we shall see in quantum mechanics.
The most obvious method of obtaining better detail is to utilize shorter wavelengths.Ultraviolet (UV) microscopes
have been constructed with special lenses that transmit UV rays and utilize photographic or electronic techniques to
record images. The shorter UV wavelengths allow somewhat greater detail to be observed, but drawbacks, such as
the hazard of UV to living tissue and the need for special detection devices and lenses (which tend to be dispersive
in the UV), severely limit the use of UV microscopes. Elsewhere, we will explore practical uses of very short
wavelength EM waves, such as x rays, and other short-wavelength probes, such as electrons in electron
microscopes, to detect small details.
Another difficulty in microscopy is the fact that many microscopic objects do not absorb much of the light passing
through them. The lack of contrast makes image interpretation very difficult.Contrastis the difference in intensity
between objects and the background on which they are observed. Stains (such as dyes, fluorophores, etc.) are
commonly employed to enhance contrast, but these tend to be application specific. More general wave interference
techniques can be used to produce contrast.Figure 27.51shows the passage of light through a sample. Since the
indices of refraction differ, the number of wavelengths in the paths differs. Light emerging from the object is thus out
of phase with light from the background and will interfere differently, producing enhanced contrast, especially if the
light is coherent and monochromatic—as in laser light.
FIGURE27.51Light rays passing through a sample under a microscope will emerge with different phases depending on their paths. The
object shown has a greater index of refraction than the background, and so the wavelength decreases as the ray passes through it.
Superimposing these rays produces interference that varies with path, enhancing contrast between the object and background.
Interference microscopesenhance contrast between objects and background by superimposing a reference beam
of light upon the light emerging from the sample. Since light from the background and objects differ in phase, there
will be different amounts of constructive and destructive interference, producing the desired contrast in final
intensity.Figure 27.52shows schematically how this is done. Parallel rays of light from a source are split into two
beams by a half-silvered mirror. These beams are called the object and reference beams. Each beam passes
through identical optical elements, except that the object beam passes through the object we wish to observe
microscopically. The light beams are recombined by another half-silvered mirror and interfere. Since the light rays
passing through different parts of the object have different phases, interference will be significantly different and,
hence, have greater contrast between them.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1241
27.9 • *Extended Topic* Microscopy Enhanced by the Wave Characteristics of Light 1223
FIGURE27.52An interference microscope utilizes interference between the reference and object beam to enhance contrast. The two
beams are split by a half-silvered mirror; the object beam is sent through the object, and the reference beam is sent through otherwise
identical optical elements. The beams are recombined by another half-silvered mirror, and the interference depends on the various phases
emerging from different parts of the object, enhancing contrast.
Another type of microscope utilizing wave interference and differences in phases to enhance contrast is called the
phase-contrast microscope. While its principle is the same as the interference microscope, the phase-contrast
microscope is simpler to use and construct. Its impact (and the principle upon which it is based) was so important
that its developer, the Dutch physicist Frits Zernike (1888–1966), was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1953.Figure
27.53shows the basic construction of a phase-contrast microscope. Phase differences between light passing
through the object and background are produced by passing the rays through different parts of a phase plate (so
called because it shifts the phase of the light passing through it). These two light rays are superimposed in the
image plane, producing contrast due to their interference.
FIGURE27.53Simplified construction of a phase-contrast microscope. Phase differences between light passing through the object and
background are produced by passing the rays through different parts of a phase plate. The light rays are superimposed in the image plane,
producing contrast due to their interference.
Apolarization microscopealso enhances contrast by utilizing a wave characteristic of light. Polarization
microscopes are useful for objects that are optically active or birefringent, particularly if those characteristics vary
from place to place in the object. Polarized light is sent through the object and then observed through a polarizing
filter that is perpendicular to the original polarization direction. Nearly transparent objects can then appear with
strong color and in high contrast. Many polarization effects are wavelength dependent, producing color in the
processed image. Contrast results from the action of the polarizing filter in passing only components parallel to its
axis.
PAGE: 1242
1224 27 • Wave Optics
Apart from the UV microscope, the variations of microscopy discussed so far in this section are available as
attachments to fairly standard microscopes or as slight variations. The next level of sophistication is provided by
commercialconfocal microscopes, which use the extended focal region shown inFigure 27.31(b) to obtain three-
dimensional images rather than two-dimensional images. Here, only a single plane or region of focus is identified;
out-of-focus regions above and below this plane are subtracted out by a computer so the image quality is much
better. This type of microscope makes use of fluorescence, where a laser provides the excitation light. Laser light
passing through a tiny aperture called a pinhole forms an extended focal region within the specimen. The reflected
light passes through the objective lens to a second pinhole and the photomultiplier detector, seeFigure 27.54. The
second pinhole is the key here and serves to block much of the light from points that are not at the focal point of the
objective lens. The pinhole is conjugate (coupled) to the focal point of the lens. The second pinhole and detector are
scanned, allowing reflected light from a small region or section of the extended focal region to be imaged at any one
time. The out-of-focus light is excluded. Each image is stored in a computer, and a full scanned image is generated
in a short time. Live cell processes can also be imaged at adequate scanning speeds allowing the imaging of three-
dimensional microscopic movement. Confocal microscopy enhances images over conventional optical microscopy,
especially for thicker specimens, and so has become quite popular.
The next level of sophistication is provided by microscopes attached to instruments that isolate and detect only a
small wavelength band of light—monochromators and spectral analyzers. Here, the monochromatic light from a
laser is scattered from the specimen. This scattered light shifts up or down as it excites particular energy levels in
the sample. The uniqueness of the observed scattered light can give detailed information about the chemical
composition of a given spot on the sample with high contrast—like molecular fingerprints. Applications are in
materials science, nanotechnology, and the biomedical field. Fine details in biochemical processes over time can
even be detected. The ultimate in microscopy is the electron microscope—to be discussed later. Research is being
conducted into the development of new prototype microscopes that can become commercially available, providing
better diagnostic and research capacities.
FIGURE27.54A confocal microscope provides three-dimensional images using pinholes and the extended depth of focus as described by
wave optics. The right pinhole illuminates a tiny region of the sample in the focal plane. In-focus light rays from this tiny region pass
through the dichroic mirror and the second pinhole to a detector and a computer. Out-of-focus light rays are blocked. The pinhole is
scanned sideways to form an image of the entire focal plane. The pinhole can then be scanned up and down to gather images from different
focal planes. The result is a three-dimensional image of the specimen.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1243
27 • Glossary 1225
Glossary
axis of a polarizing filter the direction along which horizontal plane
the filter passes the electric field of an EM wave Huygens’s principle every point on a wavefront is a
birefringent crystals that split an unpolarized beam source of wavelets that spread out in the forward
of light into two beams direction at the same speed as the wave itself. The
new wavefront is a line tangent to all of the wavelets
Brewster’s angle where is the
incoherent waves have random phase relationships
index of refraction of the medium from which the
interference microscopes microscopes that enhance
light is reflected and is the index of refraction of
contrast between objects and background by
the medium in which the reflected light travels
superimposing a reference beam of light upon the
Brewster’s law , where is the
light emerging from the sample
medium in which the incident and reflected light optically active substances that rotate the plane of
travel and is the index of refraction of the polarization of light passing through them
medium that forms the interface that reflects the order the integer used in the equations for
light constructive and destructive interference for a
coherent waves are in phase or have a definite phase double slit
relationship phase-contrast microscope microscope utilizing
confocal microscopes microscopes that use the wave interference and differences in phases to
extended focal region to obtain three-dimensional enhance contrast
images rather than two-dimensional images polarization the attribute that wave oscillations have
constructive interference for a diffraction grating a definite direction relative to the direction of
occurs when the condition propagation of the wave
is polarization microscope microscope that enhances
satisfied, where is the distance between slits in contrast by utilizing a wave characteristic of light,
the grating, is the wavelength of light, and is the useful for objects that are optically active
order of the maximum polarized waves having the electric and magnetic
constructive interference for a double slit the path field oscillations in a definite direction
length difference must be an integral multiple of the Rayleigh criterion two images are just resolvable
wavelength when the center of the diffraction pattern of one is
contrast the difference in intensity between objects directly over the first minimum of the diffraction
and the background on which they are observed pattern of the other
destructive interference for a double slit the path reflected light that is completely polarized light
length difference must be a half-integral multiple of reflected at the angle of reflection , known as
the wavelength Brewster’s angle
destructive interference for a single slit occurs thin film interference interference between light
when , reflected from different surfaces of a thin film
where is the slit width, is the light’s wavelength, ultraviolet (UV) microscopes microscopes
is the angle relative to the original direction of the constructed with special lenses that transmit UV
light, and is the order of the minimum rays and utilize photographic or electronic
diffraction the bending of a wave around the edges of techniques to record images
an opening or an obstacle unpolarized waves that are randomly polarized
diffraction grating a large number of evenly spaced vertically polarized the oscillations are in a vertical
parallel slits plane
direction of polarization the direction parallel to the wavelength in a medium , where is the
electric field for EM waves wavelength in vacuum, and is the index of
horizontally polarized the oscillations are in a refraction of the medium
Section Summary
27.1The Wave Aspect of Light: Interference considered.
• Wave characteristics are those associated with
• Wave optics is the branch of optics that must be
interference and diffraction.
used when light interacts with small objects or
• Visible light is the type of electromagnetic wave to
whenever the wave characteristics of light are
which our eyes respond and has a wavelength in
PAGE: 1244
1226 27 • Section Summary
the range of 380 to 760 nm. wavelength, is the angle relative to the original
• Like all EM waves, the following relationship is direction of the light, and is the order of the
valid in vacuum: , where is minimum. Note that there is no minimum.
the speed of light, is the frequency of the
27.6Limits of Resolution: The Rayleigh
electromagnetic wave, and is its wavelength in
Criterion
vacuum.
• The wavelength of light in a medium with index • Diffraction limits resolution.
of refraction is . Its frequency is the • For a circular aperture, lens, or mirror, the Rayleigh
same as in vacuum. criterion states that two images are just resolvable
when the center of the diffraction pattern of one is
27.2Huygens's Principle: Diffraction
directly over the first minimum of the diffraction
• An accurate technique for determining how and pattern of the other.
where waves propagate is given by Huygens’s • This occurs for two point objects separated by the
principle: Every point on a wavefront is a source of angle , where is the wavelength of
wavelets that spread out in the forward direction light (or other electromagnetic radiation) and is
at the same speed as the wave itself. The new the diameter of the aperture, lens, mirror, etc. This
wavefront is a line tangent to all of the wavelets. equation also gives the angular spreading of a
• Diffraction is the bending of a wave around the source of light having a diameter .
edges of an opening or other obstacle.
27.7Thin Film Interference
27.3Young’s Double Slit Experiment
• Thin film interference occurs between the light
• Young’s double slit experiment gave definitive reflected from the top and bottom surfaces of a
proof of the wave character of light. film. In addition to the path length difference,
• An interference pattern is obtained by the there can be a phase change.
superposition of light from two slits. • When light reflects from a medium having an index
• There is constructive interference when of refraction greater than that of the medium in
, which it is traveling, a phase change (or a
where is the distance between the slits, is the shift) occurs.
angle relative to the incident direction, and is
27.8Polarization
the order of the interference.
• There is destructive interference when
• Polarization is the attribute that wave oscillations
have a definite direction relative to the direction of
. propagation of the wave.
• EM waves are transverse waves that may be
27.4Multiple Slit Diffraction
polarized.
• A diffraction grating is a large collection of evenly • The direction of polarization is defined to be the
spaced parallel slits that produces an interference direction parallel to the electric field of the EM
pattern similar to but sharper than that of a double wave.
slit. • Unpolarized light is composed of many rays having
• There is constructive interference for a diffraction random polarization directions.
grating when • Light can be polarized by passing it through a
, where polarizing filter or other polarizing material. The
is the distance between slits in the grating, is intensity of polarized light after passing through
the wavelength of light, and is the order of the a polarizing filter is where is the
maximum. original intensity and is the angle between the
direction of polarization and the axis of the filter.
27.5Single Slit Diffraction
• Polarization is also produced by reflection.
• A single slit produces an interference pattern • Brewster’s law states that reflected light will be
characterized by a broad central maximum with completely polarized at the angle of reflection ,
narrower and dimmer maxima to the sides. known as Brewster’s angle, given by a statement
• There is destructive interference for a single slit known as Brewster’s law: , where
when
is the medium in which the incident and reflected
, where is the slit width, is the light’s
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1245
27 • Conceptual Questions 1227
light travel and is the index of refraction of the 27.9*Extended Topic* Microscopy
medium that forms the interface that reflects the Enhanced by the Wave Characteristics of
light. Light
• Polarization can also be produced by scattering.
• To improve microscope images, various
• There are a number of types of optically active
techniques utilizing the wave characteristics of
substances that rotate the direction of polarization
light have been developed. Many of these enhance
of light passing through them.
contrast with interference effects.
Conceptual Questions
27.1The Wave Aspect of Light: Interference 11. Figure 27.55shows the central part of the interference
pattern for a pure wavelength of red light projected
1. What type of experimental evidence indicates that
onto a double slit. The pattern is actually a combination
light is a wave?
of single slit and double slit interference. Note that the
2. Give an example of a wave characteristic of light
bright spots are evenly spaced. Is this a double slit or
that is easily observed outside the laboratory.
single slit characteristic? Note that some of the bright
spots are dim on either side of the center. Is this a
27.2Huygens's Principle: Diffraction
single slit or double slit characteristic? Which is
3. How do wave effects depend on the size of the smaller, the slit width or the separation between slits?
object with which the wave interacts? For example, Explain your responses.
why does sound bend around the corner of a
building while light does not?
4. Under what conditions can light be modeled like a
ray? Like a wave?
5. Go outside in the sunlight and observe your
shadow. It has fuzzy edges even if you do not. Is
this a diffraction effect? Explain. FIGURE27.55This double slit interference pattern also shows
signs of single slit interference. (credit: PASCO)
6. Why does the wavelength of light decrease when it
passes from vacuum into a medium? State which
attributes change and which stay the same and, 27.4Multiple Slit Diffraction
thus, require the wavelength to decrease.
12. What is the advantage of a diffraction grating over
7. Does Huygens’s principle apply to all types of
a double slit in dispersing light into a spectrum?
waves?
13. What are the advantages of a diffraction grating
over a prism in dispersing light for spectral
27.3Young’s Double Slit Experiment
analysis?
8. Young’s double slit experiment breaks a single light 14. Can the lines in a diffraction grating be too close
beam into two sources. Would the same pattern be together to be useful as a spectroscopic tool for
obtained for two independent sources of light, such visible light? If so, what type of EM radiation
as the headlights of a distant car? Explain. would the grating be suitable for? Explain.
9. Suppose you use the same double slit to perform 15. If a beam of white light passes through a
Young’s double slit experiment in air and then diffraction grating with vertical lines, the light is
repeat the experiment in water. Do the angles to the dispersed into rainbow colors on the right and left.
same parts of the interference pattern get larger or If a glass prism disperses white light to the right
smaller? Does the color of the light change? into a rainbow, how does the sequence of colors
Explain. compare with that produced on the right by a
10. Is it possible to create a situation in which there is diffraction grating?
only destructive interference? Explain.
PAGE: 1246
1228 27 • Conceptual Questions
16. Suppose pure-wavelength light falls on a 26. While contemplating the food value of a slice of
diffraction grating. What happens to the ham, you notice a rainbow of color reflected from
interference pattern if the same light falls on a its moist surface. Explain its origin.
grating that has more lines per centimeter? What 27. An inventor notices that a soap bubble is dark at
happens to the interference pattern if a longer- its thinnest and realizes that destructive
wavelength light falls on the same grating? Explain interference is taking place for all wavelengths.
how these two effects are consistent in terms of How could she use this knowledge to make a non-
the relationship of wavelength to the distance reflective coating for lenses that is effective at all
between slits. wavelengths? That is, what limits would there be
17. Suppose a feather appears green but has no green on the index of refraction and thickness of the
pigment. Explain in terms of diffraction. coating? How might this be impractical?
18. It is possible that there is no minimum in the 28. A non-reflective coating like the one described in
interference pattern of a single slit. Explain why. Is Example 27.6works ideally for a single
the same true of double slits and diffraction wavelength and for perpendicular incidence. What
gratings? happens for other wavelengths and other incident
directions? Be specific.
27.5Single Slit Diffraction 29. Why is it much more difficult to see interference
fringes for light reflected from a thick piece of
19. As the width of the slit producing a single-slit
glass than from a thin film? Would it be easier if
diffraction pattern is reduced, how will the
monochromatic light were used?
diffraction pattern produced change?
27.8Polarization
27.6Limits of Resolution: The Rayleigh
Criterion 30. Under what circumstances is the phase of light
changed by reflection? Is the phase related to
20. A beam of light always spreads out. Why can a
polarization?
beam not be created with parallel rays to prevent
31. Can a sound wave in air be polarized? Explain.
spreading? Why can lenses, mirrors, or apertures
32. No light passes through two perfect polarizing
not be used to correct the spreading?
filters with perpendicular axes. However, if a third
polarizing filter is placed between the original two,
27.7Thin Film Interference
some light can pass. Why is this? Under what
21. What effect does increasing the wedge angle have circumstances does most of the light pass?
on the spacing of interference fringes? If the 33. Explain what happens to the energy carried by
wedge angle is too large, fringes are not observed. light that it is dimmed by passing it through two
Why? crossed polarizing filters.
22. How is the difference in paths taken by two 34. When particles scattering light are much smaller
originally in-phase light waves related to whether than its wavelength, the amount of scattering is
they interfere constructively or destructively? How proportional to . Does this mean there is more
can this be affected by reflection? By refraction? scattering for small than large ? How does this
23. Is there a phase change in the light reflected from relate to the fact that the sky is blue?
either surface of a contact lens floating on a 35. Using the information given in the preceding
person’s tear layer? The index of refraction of the question, explain why sunsets are red.
lens is about 1.5, and its top surface is dry. 36. When light is reflected at Brewster’s angle from a
24. In placing a sample on a microscope slide, a glass smooth surface, it is polarized parallel to
cover is placed over a water drop on the glass the surface. Part of the light will be refracted into
slide. Light incident from above can reflect from the surface. Describe how you would do an
the top and bottom of the glass cover and from the experiment to determine the polarization of the
glass slide below the water drop. At which refracted light. What direction would you expect
surfaces will there be a phase change in the the polarization to have and would you expect it to
reflected light? be ?
25. Answer the above question if the fluid between
the two pieces of crown glass is carbon disulfide.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1247
27 • Problems & Exercises 1229
27.9*Extended Topic* Microscopy 38. A bright white light under water is collimated and
Enhanced by the Wave Characteristics of directed upon a prism. What range of colors does
Light one see emerging?
37. Explain how microscopes can use wave optics to
improve contrast and why this is important.
Problems & Exercises
27.1The Wave Aspect of Light: Interference 14. Find the largest wavelength of light falling on
double slits separated by for which there
1. Show that when light passes from air to water, its
is a first-order maximum. Is this in the visible part
wavelength decreases to 0.750 times its original
of the spectrum?
value.
15. What is the smallest separation between two slits
2. Find the range of visible wavelengths of light in
that will produce a second-order maximum for
crown glass.
720-nm red light?
3. What is the index of refraction of a material for
16. (a) What is the smallest separation between two
which the wavelength of light is 0.671 times its
slits that will produce a second-order maximum
value in a vacuum? Identify the likely substance.
for any visible light? (b) For all visible light?
4. Analysis of an interference effect in a clear solid
17. (a) If the first-order maximum for pure-
shows that the wavelength of light in the solid is
wavelength light falling on a double slit is at an
329 nm. Knowing this light comes from a He-Ne
angle of , at what angle is the second-order
laser and has a wavelength of 633 nm in air, is the
maximum? (b) What is the angle of the first
substance zircon or diamond?
minimum? (c) What is the highest-order maximum
5. What is the ratio of thicknesses of crown glass and
possible here?
water that would contain the same number of
18. Figure 27.56shows a double slit located a
wavelengths of light?
distance from a screen, with the distance from
the center of the screen given by . When the
27.3Young’s Double Slit Experiment
distance between the slits is relatively large,
6. At what angle is the first-order maximum for there will be numerous bright spots, called fringes.
450-nm wavelength blue light falling on double slits Show that, for small angles (where , with
separated by 0.0500 mm? in radians), the distance between fringes is given
7. Calculate the angle for the third-order maximum of by .
580-nm wavelength yellow light falling on double
slits separated by 0.100 mm.
8. What is the separation between two slits for which
610-nm orange light has its first maximum at an
angle of ?
9. Find the distance between two slits that produces
the first minimum for 410-nm violet light at an
angle of .
10. Calculate the wavelength of light that has its third
minimum at an angle of when falling on
double slits separated by . Explicitly,
show how you follow the steps inProblem-Solving
Strategies for Wave Optics.
FIGURE27.56The distance between adjacent fringes is
11. What is the wavelength of light falling on double
, assuming the slit separation is large compared
slits separated by if the third-order with .
maximum is at an angle of ?
19. Using the result of the problem above, calculate
12. At what angle is the fourth-order maximum for the
the distance between fringes for 633-nm light
situation inExercise 27.6?
falling on double slits separated by 0.0800 mm,
13. What is the highest-order maximum for 400-nm
located 3.00 m from a screen as inFigure 27.56.
light falling on double slits separated by ?
PAGE: 1248
1230 27 • Problems & Exercises
20. Using the result of the problem two problems 30. What is the spacing between structures in a
prior, find the wavelength of light that produces feather that acts as a reflection grating, given that
fringes 7.50 mm apart on a screen 2.00 m from they produce a first-order maximum for 525-nm
double slits separated by 0.120 mm (seeFigure light at a angle?
27.56). 31. Structures on a bird feather act like a reflection
grating having 8000 lines per centimeter. What is
27.4Multiple Slit Diffraction the angle of the first-order maximum for 600-nm
light?
21. A diffraction grating has 2000 lines per
32. An opal such as that shown inFigure 27.17acts
centimeter. At what angle will the first-order
like a reflection grating with rows separated by
maximum be for 520-nm-wavelength green light?
about . If the opal is illuminated normally, (a)
22. Find the angle for the third-order maximum for
at what angle will red light be seen and (b) at what
580-nm-wavelength yellow light falling on a
angle will blue light be seen?
diffraction grating having 1500 lines per
33. At what angle does a diffraction grating produces
centimeter.
a second-order maximum for light having a first-
23. How many lines per centimeter are there on a
order maximum at ?
diffraction grating that gives a first-order
34. Show that a diffraction grating cannot produce a
maximum for 470-nm blue light at an angle of
second-order maximum for a given wavelength of
?
light unless the first-order maximum is at an angle
24. What is the distance between lines on a diffraction
less than .
grating that produces a second-order maximum
35. If a diffraction grating produces a first-order
for 760-nm red light at an angle of ?
maximum for the shortest wavelength of visible
25. Calculate the wavelength of light that has its
light at , at what angle will the first-order
second-order maximum at when falling on a
maximum be for the longest wavelength of visible
diffraction grating that has 5000 lines per
light?
centimeter.
36. (a) Find the maximum number of lines per
26. An electric current through hydrogen gas
centimeter a diffraction grating can have and
produces several distinct wavelengths of visible
produce a maximum for the smallest wavelength
light. What are the wavelengths of the hydrogen
of visible light. (b) Would such a grating be useful
spectrum, if they form first-order maxima at
for ultraviolet spectra? (c) For infrared spectra?
angles of , , , and when
37. (a) Show that a 30,000-line-per-centimeter
projected on a diffraction grating having 10,000
grating will not produce a maximum for visible
lines per centimeter? Explicitly show how you
light. (b) What is the longest wavelength for which
follow the steps inProblem-Solving Strategies for
it does produce a first-order maximum? (c) What
Wave Optics
is the greatest number of lines per centimeter a
27. (a) What do the four angles in the above problem
diffraction grating can have and produce a
become if a 5000-line-per-centimeter diffraction
complete second-order spectrum for visible light?
grating is used? (b) Using this grating, what would
38. A He–Ne laser beam is reflected from the surface
the angles be for the second-order maxima? (c)
of a CD onto a wall. The brightest spot is the
Discuss the relationship between integral
reflected beam at an angle equal to the angle of
reductions in lines per centimeter and the new
incidence. However, fringes are also observed. If
angles of various order maxima.
the wall is 1.50 m from the CD, and the first fringe
28. What is the maximum number of lines per
is 0.600 m from the central maximum, what is the
centimeter a diffraction grating can have and
spacing of grooves on the CD?
produce a complete first-order spectrum for
visible light?
29. The yellow light from a sodium vapor lampseems
to be of pure wavelength, but it produces two first-
order maxima at and when
projected on a 10,000 line per centimeter
diffraction grating. What are the two wavelengths
to an accuracy of 0.1 nm?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1249
27 • Problems & Exercises 1231
39. The analysis shown in the figure below also 44. (a) Calculate the angle at which a -wide
applies to diffraction gratings with lines separated slit produces its first minimum for 410-nm violet
by a distance . What is the distance between light. (b) Where is the first minimum for 700-nm
fringes produced by a diffraction grating having red light?
125 lines per centimeter for 600-nm light, if the 45. (a) How wide is a single slit that produces its first
screen is 1.50 m away? minimum for 633-nm light at an angle of ?
(b) At what angle will the second minimum be?
46. (a) What is the width of a single slit that produces
its first minimum at for 600-nm light? (b)
Find the wavelength of light that has its first
minimum at .
47. Find the wavelength of light that has its third
minimum at an angle of when it falls on a
single slit of width .
48. Calculate the wavelength of light that produces its
first minimum at an angle of when falling on
a single slit of width .
49. (a) Sodium vapor light averaging 589 nm in
wavelength falls on a single slit of width .
FIGURE27.57The distance between adjacent fringes is
, assuming the slit separation is large At what angle does it produces its second
compared with . minimum? (b) What is the highest-order minimum
40. Unreasonable Results produced?
Red light of wavelength of 700 nm falls on a 50. (a) Find the angle of the third diffraction minimum
double slit separated by 400 nm. (a) At what angle for 633-nm light falling on a slit of width .
is the first-order maximum in the diffraction (b) What slit width would place this minimum at
pattern? (b) What is unreasonable about this ? Explicitly show how you follow the steps in
result? (c) Which assumptions are unreasonable Problem-Solving Strategies for Wave Optics
or inconsistent? 51. (a) Find the angle between the first minima for the
41. Unreasonable Results two sodium vapor lines, which have wavelengths
(a) What visible wavelength has its fourth-order of 589.1 and 589.6 nm, when they fall upon a
maximum at an angle of when projected on single slit of width . (b) What is the
a 25,000-line-per-centimeter diffraction grating? distance between these minima if the diffraction
(b) What is unreasonable about this result? (c) pattern falls on a screen 1.00 m from the slit? (c)
Which assumptions are unreasonable or Discuss the ease or difficulty of measuring such a
inconsistent? distance.
42. Construct Your Own Problem 52. (a) What is the minimum width of a single slit (in
Consider a spectrometer based on a diffraction multiples of ) that will produce a first minimum
grating. Construct a problem in which you for a wavelength ? (b) What is its minimum width
calculate the distance between two wavelengths if it produces 50 minima? (c) 1000 minima?
of electromagnetic radiation in your spectrometer. 53. (a) If a single slit produces a first minimum at
Among the things to be considered are the , at what angle is the second-order
wavelengths you wish to be able to distinguish, minimum? (b) What is the angle of the third-order
the number of lines per meter on the diffraction minimum? (c) Is there a fourth-order minimum?
grating, and the distance from the grating to the (d) Use your answers to illustrate how the angular
screen or detector. Discuss the practicality of the width of the central maximum is about twice the
device in terms of being able to discern between angular width of the next maximum (which is the
wavelengths of interest. angle between the first and second minima).
27.5Single Slit Diffraction
43. (a) At what angle is the first minimum for 550-nm
light falling on a single slit of width ? (b)
Will there be a second minimum?
PAGE: 1250
1232 27 • Problems & Exercises
54. A double slit produces a diffraction pattern that is 60. (a) What is the minimum angular spread of a
a combination of single and double slit 633-nm wavelength He-Ne laser beam that is
interference. Find the ratio of the width of the slits originally 1.00 mm in diameter?
to the separation between them, if the first (b) If this laser is aimed at a mountain cliff 15.0
minimum of the single slit pattern falls on the fifth km away, how big will the illuminated spot be?
maximum of the double slit pattern. (This will (c) How big a spot would be illuminated on the
greatly reduce the intensity of the fifth maximum.) Moon, neglecting atmospheric effects? (This might
55. Integrated Concepts be done to hit a corner reflector to measure the
A water break at the entrance to a harbor consists round-trip time and, hence, distance.) Explicitly
of a rock barrier with a 50.0-m-wide opening. show how you follow the steps inProblem-Solving
Ocean waves of 20.0-m wavelength approach the Strategies for Wave Optics.
opening straight on. At what angle to the incident 61. A telescope can be used to enlarge the diameter
direction are the boats inside the harbor most of a laser beam and limit diffraction spreading.
protected against wave action? The laser beam is sent through the telescope in
56. Integrated Concepts opposite the normal direction and can then be
An aircraft maintenance technician walks past a projected onto a satellite or the Moon.
tall hangar door that acts like a single slit for (a) If this is done with the Mount Wilson telescope,
sound entering the hangar. Outside the door, on a producing a 2.54-m-diameter beam of 633-nm
line perpendicular to the opening in the door, a jet light, what is the minimum angular spread of the
engine makes a 600-Hz sound. At what angle with beam (the angle between the beam's maximum
the door will the technician observe the first and its first zero)?
minimum in sound intensity if the vertical opening (b) Neglecting atmospheric effects, what is the
is 0.800 m wide and the speed of sound is 340 m/ size of the spot this beam would make on the
s? Moon, assuming a lunar distance of
?
27.6Limits of Resolution: The Rayleigh 62. The limit to the eye’s acuity is actually related to
Criterion diffraction by the pupil.
(a) What is the angle between two just-resolvable
57. The 300-m-diameter Arecibo radio telescope
points of light for a 3.00-mm-diameter pupil,
pictured inFigure 27.28detects radio waves with
assuming an average wavelength of 550 nm?
a 4.00 cm average wavelength.
(b) Take your result to be the practical limit for the
(a) What is the angle between two just-resolvable
eye. What is the greatest possible distance a car
point sources for this telescope?
can be from you if you can resolve its two
(b) How close together could these point sources
headlights, given they are 1.30 m apart?
be at the 2 million light year distance of the
(c) What is the distance between two just-
Andromeda galaxy?
resolvable points held at an arm’s length (0.800
58. Assuming the angular resolution found for the
m) from your eye?
Hubble Telescope inExample 27.5, what is the
(d) How does your answer to (c) compare to
smallest detail that could be observed on the
details you normally observe in everyday
Moon?
circumstances?
59. Diffraction spreading for a flashlight is insignificant
63. What is the minimum diameter mirror on a
compared with other limitations in its optics, such
telescope that would allow you to see details as
as spherical aberrations in its mirror. To show this,
small as 5.00 km on the Moon some 384,000 km
calculate the minimum angular spreading of a
away? Assume an average wavelength of 550 nm
flashlight beam that is originally 5.00 cm in
for the light received.
diameter with an average wavelength of 600 nm.
64. You are told not to shoot until you see the whites
of their eyes. If the eyes are separated by 6.5 cm
and the diameter of your pupil is 5.0 mm, at what
distance can you resolve the two eyes using light
of wavelength 555 nm?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1251
27 • Problems & Exercises 1233
65. (a) The planet Pluto and its Moon Charon are 27.7Thin Film Interference
separated by 19,600 km. Neglecting atmospheric
70. A soap bubble is 100 nm thick and illuminated by
effects, should the 5.08-m-diameter Mount
white light incident perpendicular to its surface.
Palomar telescope be able to resolve these bodies
What wavelength and color of visible light is most
when they are from Earth?
constructively reflected, assuming the same index
Assume an average wavelength of 550 nm.
of refraction as water?
(b) In actuality, it is just barely possible to discern
71. An oil slick on water is 120 nm thick and
that Pluto and Charon are separate bodies using
illuminated by white light incident perpendicular
an Earth-based telescope. What are the reasons
to its surface. What color does the oil appear
for this?
(what is the most constructively reflected
66. The headlights of a car are 1.3 m apart. What is
wavelength), given its index of refraction is 1.40?
the maximum distance at which the eye can
72. Calculate the minimum thickness of an oil slick on
resolve these two headlights? Take the pupil
water that appears blue when illuminated by
diameter to be 0.40 cm.
white light perpendicular to its surface. Take the
67. When dots are placed on a page from a laser
blue wavelength to be 470 nm and the index of
printer, they must be close enough so that you do
refraction of oil to be 1.40.
not see the individual dots of ink. To do this, the
73. Find the minimum thickness of a soap bubble that
separation of the dots must be less than Raleigh’s
appears red when illuminated by white light
criterion. Take the pupil of the eye to be 3.0 mm
perpendicular to its surface. Take the wavelength
and the distance from the paper to the eye of 35
to be 680 nm, and assume the same index of
cm; find the minimum separation of two dots such
refraction as water.
that they cannot be resolved. How many dots per
74. A film of soapy water ( ) on top of a plastic
inch (dpi) does this correspond to?
cutting board has a thickness of 233 nm. What
68. Unreasonable Results
color is most strongly reflected if it is illuminated
An amateur astronomer wants to build a telescope
perpendicular to its surface?
with a diffraction limit that will allow him to see if
75. What are the three smallest non-zero thicknesses
there are people on the moons of Jupiter.
of soapy water ( ) on Plexiglas if it appears
(a) What diameter mirror is needed to be able to
green (constructively reflecting 520-nm light)
see 1.00 m detail on a Jovian Moon at a distance
when illuminated perpendicularly by white light?
of from Earth? The wavelength of
Explicitly show how you follow the steps in
light averages 600 nm.
Problem Solving Strategies for Wave Optics.
(b) What is unreasonable about this result?
76. Suppose you have a lens system that is to be used
(c) Which assumptions are unreasonable or
primarily for 700-nm red light. What is the second
inconsistent?
thinnest coating of fluorite (magnesium fluoride)
69. Construct Your Own Problem
that would be non-reflective for this wavelength?
Consider diffraction limits for an electromagnetic
77. (a) As a soap bubble thins it becomes dark,
wave interacting with a circular object. Construct a
because the path length difference becomes small
problem in which you calculate the limit of angular
compared with the wavelength of light and there is
resolution with a device, using this circular object
a phase shift at the top surface. If it becomes dark
(such as a lens, mirror, or antenna) to make
when the path length difference is less than one-
observations. Also calculate the limit to spatial
fourth the wavelength, what is the thickest the
resolution (such as the size of features observable
bubble can be and appear dark at all visible
on the Moon) for observations at a specific
wavelengths? Assume the same index of
distance from the device. Among the things to be
refraction as water. (b) Discuss the fragility of the
considered are the wavelength of electromagnetic
film considering the thickness found.
radiation used, the size of the circular object, and
the distance to the system or phenomenon being
observed.
PAGE: 1252
1234 27 • Problems & Exercises
78. A film of oil on water will appear dark when it is 87. What angle would the axis of a polarizing filter
very thin, because the path length difference need to make with the direction of polarized light
becomes small compared with the wavelength of of intensity to reduce the intensity to
light and there is a phase shift at the top surface. If ?
it becomes dark when the path length difference is 88. At the end ofExample 27.8, it was stated that the
less than one-fourth the wavelength, what is the intensity of polarized light is reduced to of
thickest the oil can be and appear dark at all its original value by passing through a polarizing
visible wavelengths? Oil has an index of refraction filter with its axis at an angle of to the
of 1.40. direction of polarization. Verify this statement.
79. Figure 27.34 shows two glass slides illuminated by 89. Show that if you have three polarizing filters, with
pure-wavelength light incident perpendicularly. the second at an angle of to the first and the
The top slide touches the bottom slide at one end third at an angle of to the first, the intensity
and rests on a 0.100-mm-diameter hair at the of light passed by the first will be reduced to
other end, forming a wedge of air. (a) How far apart of its value. (This is in contrast to having
are the dark bands, if the slides are 7.50 cm long only the first and third, which reduces the intensity
and 589-nm light is used? (b) Is there any to zero, so that placing the second between them
difference if the slides are made from crown or increases the intensity of the transmitted light.)
flint glass? Explain. 90. Prove that, if is the intensity of light transmitted
80. Figure 27.34 shows two 7.50-cm-long glass slides by two polarizing filters with axes at an angle
illuminated by pure 589-nm wavelength light and is the intensity when the axes are at an
incident perpendicularly. The top slide touches the angle then the original
bottom slide at one end and rests on some debris
intensity. (Hint: Use the trigonometric identities
at the other end, forming a wedge of air. How thick
and )
is the debris, if the dark bands are 1.00 mm apart?
91. At what angle will light reflected from diamond be
81. Repeat Exercise 27.70, but take the light to be
completely polarized?
incident at a angle.
92. What is Brewster’s angle for light traveling in
82. Repeat Exercise 27.71, but take the light to be
water that is reflected from crown glass?
incident at a angle.
93. A scuba diver sees light reflected from the water’s
83. Unreasonable Results
surface. At what angle will this light be completely
To save money on making military aircraft invisible
polarized?
to radar, an inventor decides to coat them with a
94. At what angle is light inside crown glass
non-reflective material having an index of
completely polarized when reflected from water,
refraction of 1.20, which is between that of air and
as in a fish tank?
the surface of the plane. This, he reasons, should
95. Light reflected at from a window is
be much cheaper than designing Stealth bombers.
completely polarized. What is the window’s index
(a)What thickness should the coating be to inhibit
of refraction and the likely substance of which it is
the reflection of 4.00-cm wavelength radar? (b)
made?
What is unreasonable about this result? (c) Which
96. (a) Light reflected at from a gemstone in a
assumptions are unreasonable or inconsistent?
ring is completely polarized. Can the gem be a
diamond? (b) At what angle would the light be
27.8Polarization completely polarized if the gem was in water?
97. If is Brewster’s angle for light reflected from
84. What angle is needed between the direction of
the top of an interface between two substances,
polarized light and the axis of a polarizing filter to
and is Brewster’s angle for light reflected from
cut its intensity in half?
below, prove that
85. The angle between the axes of two polarizing
98. Integrated Concepts
filters is . By how much does the second filter
If a polarizing filter reduces the intensity of
reduce the intensity of the light coming through
polarized light to of its original value, by
the first?
how much are the electric and magnetic fields
86. If you have completely polarized light of intensity
reduced?
, what will its intensity be after passing
through a polarizing filter with its axis at an
angle to the light’s polarization direction?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1253
27 • Problems & Exercises 1235
99. Integrated Concepts 101. Critical ThinkingA semiconductor laser emits
Suppose you put on two pairs of Polaroid light at 400.0 nm. The light is passed through a
sunglasses with their axes at an angle of . grating where 1,000 lines are etched covering a
How much longer will it take the light to deposit a space of 10.00 mm. The light is directed directly
given amount of energy in your eye compared with at the grating. (a) What is the angle the light
a single pair of sunglasses? Assume the lenses are beam diffracts for first order diffraction? (b) What
clear except for their polarizing characteristics. is the angle the light beam diffracts for second
100. Integrated Concepts order diffraction? (c) The laser is changed out.
(a) On a day when the intensity of sunlight is The first order angle of diffraction is now .
, a circular lens 0.200 m in diameter What wavelength of light does it produce? (d) If a
focuses light onto water in a black aluminum new grating with the spacing between the lines
beaker. Two polarizing sheets of plastic are doubled were to replace the one above, what
placed in front of the lens with their axes at an would the new angle be for part a? (e) Would the
angle of Assuming the sunlight is magnitude of the angle of diffraction be different
unpolarized and the polarizers are going left from going right?
efficient, what is the initial rate of heating of the
water in , assuming it is absorbed?
The aluminum beaker has a mass of 30.0 grams
and contains 250 grams of water. (b) Do the
polarizing filters get hot? Explain.
PAGE: 1254
1236 27 • Problems & Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1255
CHAPTER 28
Special Relativity
FIGURE28.1Special relativity has implications and applications ranging from space travel and our understanding of time to everyday
technologies such as Global Positioning Systems. In order to be effective, GPS, whether it is a part of a mobile phone or a shark tracking
system, must account for relativistic principles such as time dilation. (credit: UW News/Flickr)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
28.1Einstein’s Postulates
28.2Simultaneity And Time Dilation
28.3Length Contraction
28.4Relativistic Addition of Velocities
28.5Relativistic Momentum
28.6Relativistic Energy
INTRODUCTION TO SPECIAL RELATIVITY Have you ever looked up at the night sky and dreamed of traveling to
other planets in faraway star systems? Would there be other life forms? What would other worlds look like? You
might imagine that such an amazing trip would be possible if we could just travel fast enough, but you will read in
this chapter why this is not true. In 1905 Albert Einstein developed the theory of special relativity. This theory
explains the limit on an object’s speed and describes the consequences.
Relativity does not only apply to far-reaching and (as yet) unrealized activities like human interstellar travel. It
affects everyday life in the form of communication, global trade, and even medicine. For example, Global Positioning
Systems, which drive everything from airplane navigation to smart phone maps, rely on signals captured by multiple
orbiting satellites and highly accurate measurements of time. Every signal passing between satellites, towers, and
devices must be precisely measured and account for the relativistic effect of curved space and time dilation
(discussed below). Variations in Earth’s landscape, its non-spherical shape, and the effects of gravity must also be
considered in order to obtain accurate measurements. One of the most important contributors to these systems was
Gladys West, a computer scientist and mathematician working at the Naval Proving Ground, where GPS and related
PAGE: 1256
1238 28 • Special Relativity
technologies were advanced. West had previously developed altimeter models and managed the world’s first
satellite-based ocean mapping project (Seastat). She then developed and programmed the algorithms capable of
calculating positions and Earth’s shape to sufficient precisions to enable the existence of GPS. In these calculations,
she accounted for the impacts of relativity and other complex principles related to it.
Relativity. The wordrelativitymight conjure an image of Einstein, but the idea did not begin with him. People have
been exploring relativity for many centuries. Relativity is the study of how different observers measure the same
event. Galileo and Newton developed the first correct version of classical relativity. Einstein developed the modern
theory of relativity. Modern relativity is divided into two parts.Special relativitydeals with observers who are moving
at constant velocity.General relativitydeals with observers who are undergoing acceleration. Einstein is famous
because his theories of relativity made revolutionary predictions. Most importantly, his theories have been verified
to great precision in a vast range of experiments, altering forever our concept of space and time.
FIGURE28.2Many people think that Albert Einstein (1879–1955) was the greatest physicist of the 20th century. Not only did he develop
modern relativity, thus revolutionizing our concept of the universe, he also made fundamental contributions to the foundations of quantum
mechanics. (credit: The Library of Congress)
It is important to note that although classical mechanics, in general, and classical relativity, in particular, are limited,
they are extremely good approximations for large, slow-moving objects. Otherwise, we could not use classical
physics to launch satellites or build bridges. In the classical limit (objects larger than submicroscopic and moving
slower than about 1% of the speed of light), relativistic mechanics becomes the same as classical mechanics. This
fact will be noted at appropriate places throughout this chapter.
28.1 Einstein’s Postulates
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• State and explain both of Einstein’s postulates.
• Explain what an inertial frame of reference is.
• Describe one way the speed of light can be changed.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1257
28.1 • Einstein’s Postulates 1239
FIGURE28.3Special relativity resembles trigonometry in that both are reliable because they are based on postulates that flow one from
another in a logical way. (credit: Jon Oakley, Flickr)
Have you ever used the Pythagorean Theorem and gotten a wrong answer? Probably not, unless you made a mistake
in either your algebra or your arithmetic. Each time you perform the same calculation, you know that the answer will
be the same. Trigonometry is reliable because of the certainty that one part always flows from another in a logical
way. Each part is based on a set of postulates, and you can always connect the parts by applying those postulates.
Physics is the same way with the exception thatallparts must describe nature. If we are careful to choose the
correct postulates, then our theory will follow and will be verified by experiment.
Einstein essentially did the theoretical aspect of this method forrelativity. With two deceptively simple postulates
and a careful consideration of how measurements are made, he produced the theory ofspecial relativity.
Einstein’s First Postulate
The first postulate upon which Einstein based the theory of special relativity relates to reference frames. All
velocities are measured relative to some frame of reference. For example, a car’s motion is measured relative to its
starting point or the road it is moving over, a projectile’s motion is measured relative to the surface it was launched
from, and a planet’s orbit is measured relative to the star it is orbiting around. The simplest frames of reference are
those that are not accelerated and are not rotating. Newton’s first law, the law of inertia, holds exactly in such a
frame.
Inertial Reference Frame
Aninertial frame of referenceis a reference frame in which a body at rest remains at rest and a body in motion
moves at a constant speed in a straight line unless acted on by an outside force.
The laws of physics seem to be simplest in inertial frames. For example, when you are in a plane flying at a constant
altitude and speed, physics seems to work exactly the same as if you were standing on the surface of the Earth.
However, in a plane that is taking off, matters are somewhat more complicated. In these cases, the net force on an
object, , is not equal to the product of mass and acceleration, . Instead, is equal to plus a fictitious force.
This situation is not as simple as in an inertial frame. Not only are laws of physics simplest in inertial frames, but
they should be the same in all inertial frames, since there is no preferred frame and no absolute motion. Einstein
incorporated these ideas into hisfirst postulate of special relativity.
First Postulate of Special Relativity
The laws of physics are the same and can be stated in their simplest form in all inertial frames of reference.
As with many fundamental statements, there is more to this postulate than meets the eye. The laws of physics
include only those that satisfy this postulate. We shall find that the definitions of relativistic momentum and energy
must be altered to fit. Another outcome of this postulate is the famous equation .
PAGE: 1258
1240 28 • Special Relativity
Einstein’s Second Postulate
The second postulate upon which Einstein based his theory of special relativity deals with the speed of light. Late in
the 19th century, the major tenets of classical physics were well established. Two of the most important were the
laws of electricity and magnetism and Newton’s laws. In particular, the laws of electricity and magnetism predict
that light travels at in a vacuum, but they do not specify the frame of reference in which light
has this speed.
There was a contradiction between this prediction and Newton’s laws, in which velocities add like simple vectors. If
the latter were true, then two observers moving at different speeds would see light traveling at different speeds.
Imagine what a light wave would look like to a person traveling along with it at a speed . If such a motion were
possible then the wave would be stationary relative to the observer. It would have electric and magnetic fields that
varied in strength at various distances from the observer but were constant in time. This is not allowed by Maxwell’s
equations. So either Maxwell’s equations are wrong, or an object with mass cannot travel at speed . Einstein
concluded that the latter is true. An object with mass cannot travel at speed . This conclusion implies that light in a
vacuum must always travel at speed relative to any observer. Maxwell’s equations are correct, and Newton’s
addition of velocities is not correct for light.
Investigations such as Young’s double slit experiment in the early-1800s had convincingly demonstrated that light is
a wave. Many types of waves were known, and all travelled in some medium. Scientists therefore assumed that a
medium carried light, even in a vacuum, and light travelled at a speed relative to that medium. Starting in the
mid-1880s, the American physicist A. A. Michelson, later aided by E. W. Morley, made a series of direct
measurements of the speed of light. The results of their measurements were startling.
Michelson-Morley Experiment
TheMichelson-Morley experimentdemonstrated that the speed of light in a vacuum is independent of the
motion of the Earth about the Sun.
The eventual conclusion derived from this result is that light, unlike mechanical waves such as sound, does not need
a medium to carry it. Furthermore, the Michelson-Morley results implied that the speed of light is independent of
the motion of the source relative to the observer. That is, everyone observes light to move at speed regardless of
how they move relative to the source or one another. For a number of years, many scientists tried unsuccessfully to
explain these results and still retain the general applicability of Newton’s laws.
It was not until 1905, when Einstein published his first paper on special relativity, that the currently accepted
conclusion was reached. Based mostly on his analysis that the laws of electricity and magnetism would not allow
another speed for light, and only slightly aware of the Michelson-Morley experiment, Einstein detailed hissecond
postulate of special relativity.
Second Postulate of Special Relativity
The speed of light is a constant, independent of the relative motion of the source.
Deceptively simple and counterintuitive, this and the first postulate leave all else open for change. Some
fundamental concepts do change. Among the changes are the loss of agreement on the elapsed time for an event,
the variation of distance with speed, and the realization that matter and energy can be converted into one another.
You will read about these concepts in the following sections.
Misconception Alert: Constancy of the Speed of Light
The speed of light is a constant in a vacuum. If you remember the effect of the index of
refraction fromThe Law of Refraction, the speed of light is lower in matter.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1259
28.2 • Simultaneity And Time Dilation 1241
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Explain how special relativity differs from general relativity.
Solution
Special relativity applies only to unaccelerated motion, but general relativity applies to accelerated motion.
28.2 Simultaneity And Time Dilation
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe simultaneity.
• Describe time dilation.
• Calculate γ.
• Compare proper time and the observer’s measured time.
• Explain why the twin paradox is a false paradox.
FIGURE28.4Elapsed time for a foot race is the same for all observers, but at relativistic speeds, elapsed time depends on the relative
motion of the observer and the event that is observed. (credit: Jason Edward Scott Bain, Flickr)
Do time intervals depend on who observes them? Intuitively, we expect the time for a process, such as the elapsed
time for a foot race, to be the same for all observers. Our experience has been that disagreements over elapsed time
have to do with the accuracy of measuring time. When we carefully consider just how time is measured, however, we
will find that elapsed time depends on the relative motion of an observer with respect to the process being
measured.
Simultaneity
Consider how we measure elapsed time. If we use a stopwatch, for example, how do we know when to start and
stop the watch? One method is to use the arrival of light from the event, such as observing a light turning green to
start a drag race. The timing will be more accurate if some sort of electronic detection is used, avoiding human
reaction times and other complications.
Now suppose we use this method to measure the time interval between two flashes of light produced by flash
lamps. (SeeFigure 28.5.) Two flash lamps with observer A midway between them are on a rail car that moves to the
right relative to observer B. Observer B arranges for the light flashes to be emitted just as A passes B, so that both A
and B are equidistant from the lamps when the light is emitted. Observer B measures the time interval between the
arrival of the light flashes. According to postulate 2, the speed of light is not affected by the motion of the lamps
relative to B. Therefore, light travels equal distances to him at equal speeds. Thus observer B measures the flashes
to be simultaneous.
PAGE: 1260
1242 28 • Special Relativity
FIGURE28.5Observer B measures the elapsed time between the arrival of light flashes as described in the text. Observer A moves with
the lamps on a rail car. Observer B views the light flashes occurring simultaneously. Observer B views the light on the right reaching
observer A before the light on the left does.
Now consider what observer A sees happening. Since both lamps are the same distance from her in her reference
frame and the train is moving to the right, she perceives the flash from the right-hand bulb occurring before the left-
hand bulb. Here a relative velocity between observers affects whether two events are observed to be simultaneous.
Simultaneity is not absolute..
This illustrates the power of clear thinking. We might have guessed incorrectly that if light is emitted simultaneously,
then two observers halfway between the sources would see the flashes simultaneously. But careful analysis shows
this not to be the case. Einstein was brilliant at this type ofthought experiment(in German,
“Gedankenexperiment”). He very carefully considered how an observation is made and disregarded what might
seem obvious. The validity of thought experiments, of course, is determined by actual observation. The genius of
Einstein is evidenced by the fact that experiments have repeatedly confirmed his theory of relativity.
In summary: Two events are defined to be simultaneous if an observer measures them as occurring at the same
time (such as by receiving light from the events). Two events are not necessarily simultaneous to all observers.
Time Dilation
The consideration of the measurement of elapsed time and simultaneity leads to an important relativistic effect.
Time dilation
Time dilationis the phenomenon of time passing slower for an observer who is moving relative to another
observer.
Suppose, for example, an astronaut measures the time it takes for light to cross her ship, bounce off a mirror, and
return. (SeeFigure 28.6.) How does the elapsed time the astronaut measures compare with the elapsed time
measured for the same event by a person on the Earth? Asking this question (another thought experiment) produces
a profound result. We find that the elapsed time for a process depends on who is measuring it. In this case, the time
measured by the astronaut is smaller than the time measured by the Earth-bound observer. The passage of time is
different for the observers because the distance the light travels in the astronaut’s frame is smaller than in the
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1261
28.2 • Simultaneity And Time Dilation 1243
Earth-bound frame. Light travels at the same speed in each frame, and so it will take longer to travel the greater
distance in the Earth-bound frame.
FIGURE28.6(a) An astronaut measures the time for light to cross her ship using an electronic timer. Light travels a distance in the
astronaut’s frame. (b) A person on the Earth sees the light follow the longer path and take a longer time . (c) These triangles are used
to find the relationship between the two distances and .
To quantitatively verify that time depends on the observer, consider the paths followed by light as seen by each
observer. (SeeFigure 28.6(c).) The astronaut sees the light travel straight across and back for a total distance of ,
twice the width of her ship. The Earth-bound observer sees the light travel a total distance . Since the ship is
moving at speed to the right relative to the Earth, light moving to the right hits the mirror in this frame. Light travels
at a speed in both frames, and because time is the distance divided by speed, the time measured by the astronaut
is
28.1
This time has a separate name to distinguish it from the time measured by the Earth-bound observer.
Proper Time
Proper time is the time measured by an observer at rest relative to the event being observed.
In the case of the astronaut observe the reflecting light, the astronaut measures proper time. The time measured by
the Earth-bound observer is
28.2
To find the relationship between and , consider the triangles formed by and . (SeeFigure 28.6(c).) The
third side of these similar triangles is , the distance the astronaut moves as the light goes across her ship. In the
frame of the Earth-bound observer,
28.3
Using the Pythagorean Theorem, the distance is found to be
PAGE: 1262
1244 28 • Special Relativity
28.4
Substituting into the expression for the time interval gives
28.5
We square this equation, which yields
28.6
Note that if we square the first expression we had for , we get . This term appears in the preceding
equation, giving us a means to relate the two time intervals. Thus,
28.7
Gathering terms, we solve for :
28.8
Thus,
28.9
Taking the square root yields an important relationship between elapsed times:
28.10
where
28.11
This equation for is truly remarkable. First, as contended, elapsed time is not the same for different observers
moving relative to one another, even though both are in inertial frames. Proper time measured by an observer,
like the astronaut moving with the apparatus, is smaller than time measured by other observers. Since those other
observers measure a longer time , the effect is called time dilation. The Earth-bound observer sees time dilate
(get longer) for a system moving relative to the Earth. Alternatively, according to the Earth-bound observer, time
slows in the moving frame, since less time passes there. All clocks moving relative to an observer, including
biological clocks such as aging, are observed to run slow compared with a clock stationary relative to the observer.
Note that if the relative velocity is much less than the speed of light ( ), then is extremely small, and the
elapsed times and are nearly equal. At low velocities, modern relativity approaches classical physics—our
everyday experiences have very small relativistic effects.
The equation also implies that relative velocity cannot exceed the speed of light. As approaches ,
approaches infinity. This would imply that time in the astronaut’s frame stops at the speed of light. If exceeded ,
then we would be taking the square root of a negative number, producing an imaginary value for .
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1263
28.2 • Simultaneity And Time Dilation 1245
There is considerable experimental evidence that the equation is correct. One example is found in
cosmic ray particles that continuously rain down on the Earth from deep space. Some collisions of these particles
with nuclei in the upper atmosphere result in short-lived particles called muons. The half-life (amount of time for
half of a material to decay) of a muon is when it is at rest relative to the observer who measures the half-life.
This is the proper time . Muons produced by cosmic ray particles have a range of velocities, with some moving
near the speed of light. It has been found that the muon’s half-life as measured by an Earth-bound observer ( )
varies with velocity exactly as predicted by the equation . The faster the muon moves, the longer it lives.
We on the Earth see the muon’s half-life time dilated—as viewed from our frame, the muon decays more slowly than
it does when at rest relative to us.
EXAMPLE 28.1
Calculating for a Relativistic Event: How Long Does a Speedy Muon Live?
Suppose a cosmic ray colliding with a nucleus in the Earth’s upper atmosphere produces a muon that has a velocity
. The muon then travels at constant velocity and lives as measured in the muon’s frame of
reference. (You can imagine this as the muon’s internal clock.) How long does the muon live as measured by an
Earth-bound observer? (SeeFigure 28.7.)
FIGURE28.7A muon in the Earth’s atmosphere lives longer as measured by an Earth-bound observer than measured by the muon’s
internal clock.
Strategy
A clock moving with the system being measured observes the proper time, so the time we are given is
. The Earth-bound observer measures as given by the equation . Since we know the
velocity, the calculation is straightforward.
Solution
1) Identify the knowns. ,
2) Identify the unknown.
3) Choose the appropriate equation.
Use,
28.12
where
PAGE: 1264
1246 28 • Special Relativity
28.13
4) Plug the knowns into the equation.
First find .
28.14
Use the calculated value of to determine .
28.15
Discussion
One implication of this example is that since at of the speed of light ( ), the relativistic
effects are significant. The two time intervals differ by this factor of 3.20, where classically they would be the same.
Something moving at is said to be highly relativistic.
Another implication of the preceding example is that everything an astronaut does when moving at of the
speed of light relative to the Earth takes 3.20 times longer when observed from the Earth. Does the astronaut sense
this? Only if she looks outside her spaceship. All methods of measuring time in her frame will be affected by the
same factor of 3.20. This includes her wristwatch, heart rate, cell metabolism rate, nerve impulse rate, and so on.
She will have no way of telling, since all of her clocks will agree with one another because their relative velocities are
zero. Motion is relative, not absolute. But what if she does look out the window?
Real-World Connections
It may seem that special relativity has little effect on your life, but it is probably more important than you realize.
One of the most common effects is through the Global Positioning System (GPS). Emergency vehicles, package
delivery services, electronic maps, and communications devices are just a few of the common uses of GPS, and
the GPS system could not work without taking into account relativistic effects. GPS satellites rely on precise time
measurements to communicate. The signals travel at relativistic speeds. Without corrections for time dilation,
the satellites could not communicate, and the GPS system would fail within minutes.
The Twin Paradox
An intriguing consequence of time dilation is that a space traveler moving at a high velocity relative to the Earth
would age less than her Earth-bound twin. Imagine the astronaut moving at such a velocity that , as in
Figure 28.8. A trip that takes 2.00 years in her frame would take 60.0 years in her Earth-bound twin’s frame.
Suppose the astronaut traveled 1.00 year to another star system. She briefly explored the area, and then traveled
1.00 year back. If the astronaut was 40 years old when she left, she would be 42 upon her return. Everything on the
Earth, however, would have aged 60.0 years. Her twin, if still alive, would be 100 years old.
The situation would seem different to the astronaut. Because motion is relative, the spaceship would seem to be
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1265
28.2 • Simultaneity And Time Dilation 1247
stationary and the Earth would appear to move. (This is the sensation you have when flying in a jet.) If the astronaut
looks out the window of the spaceship, she will see time slow down on the Earth by a factor of . To her, the
Earth-bound sister will have aged only 2/30 (1/15) of a year, while she aged 2.00 years. The two sisters cannot both
be correct.
FIGURE28.8The twin paradox asks why the traveling twin ages less than the Earth-bound twin. That is the prediction we obtain if we
consider the Earth-bound twin’s frame. In the astronaut’s frame, however, the Earth is moving and time runs slower there. Who is correct?
As with all paradoxes, the premise is faulty and leads to contradictory conclusions. In fact, the astronaut’s motion is
significantly different from that of the Earth-bound twin. The astronaut accelerates to a high velocity and then
decelerates to view the star system. To return to the Earth, she again accelerates and decelerates. The Earth-bound
twin does not experience these accelerations. So the situation is not symmetric, and it is not correct to claim that
the astronaut will observe the same effects as her Earth-bound twin. If you use special relativity to examine the twin
paradox, you must keep in mind that the theory is expressly based on inertial frames, which by definition are not
accelerated or rotating. Einstein developed general relativity to deal with accelerated frames and with gravity, a
prime source of acceleration. You can also use general relativity to address the twin paradox and, according to
general relativity, the astronaut will age less. Some important conceptual aspects of general relativity are discussed
inGeneral Relativity and Quantum Gravityof this course.
In 1971, American physicists Joseph Hafele and Richard Keating verified time dilation at low relative velocities by
flying extremely accurate atomic clocks around the Earth on commercial aircraft. They measured elapsed time to an
accuracy of a few nanoseconds and compared it with the time measured by clocks left behind. Hafele and Keating’s
results were within experimental uncertainties of the predictions of relativity. Both special and general relativity had
to be taken into account, since gravity and accelerations were involved as well as relative motion.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
1. What is if ?
2. A particle travels at and lives when at rest relative to an observer. How long does
the particle live as viewed in the laboratory?
Solution
1.
2.
PAGE: 1266
1248 28 • Special Relativity
28.3 Length Contraction
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe proper length.
• Calculate length contraction.
• Explain why we don’t notice these effects at everyday scales.
FIGURE28.9People might describe distances differently, but at relativistic speeds, the distances really are different. (credit: Corey
Leopold, Flickr)
Have you ever driven on a road that seems like it goes on forever? If you look ahead, you might say you have about
10 km left to go. Another traveler might say the road ahead looks like it’s about 15 km long. If you both measured
the road, however, you would agree. Traveling at everyday speeds, the distance you both measure would be the
same. You will read in this section, however, that this is not true at relativistic speeds. Close to the speed of light,
distances measured are not the same when measured by different observers.
Proper Length
One thing all observers agree upon is relative speed. Even though clocks measure different elapsed times for the
same process, they still agree that relative speed, which is distance divided by elapsed time, is the same. This
implies that distance, too, depends on the observer’s relative motion. If two observers see different times, then they
must also see different distances for relative speed to be the same to each of them.
The muon discussed inExample 28.1illustrates this concept. To an observer on the Earth, the muon travels at
for from the time it is produced until it decays. Thus it travels a distance
28.16
relative to the Earth. In the muon’s frame of reference, its lifetime is only . It has enough time to travel only
28.17
The distance between the same two events (production and decay of a muon) depends on who measures it and how
they are moving relative to it.
Proper Length
Proper length is the distance between two points measured by an observer who is at rest relative to both of
the points.
The Earth-bound observer measures the proper length , because the points at which the muon is produced and
decays are stationary relative to the Earth. To the muon, the Earth, air, and clouds are moving, and so the distance
it sees is not the proper length.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1267
28.3 • Length Contraction 1249
FIGURE28.10(a) The Earth-bound observer sees the muon travel 2.01 km between clouds. (b) The muon sees itself travel the same path,
but only a distance of 0.627 km. The Earth, air, and clouds are moving relative to the muon in its frame, and all appear to have smaller
lengths along the direction of travel.
Length Contraction
To develop an equation relating distances measured by different observers, we note that the velocity relative to the
Earth-bound observer in our muon example is given by
28.18
The time relative to the Earth-bound observer is , since the object being timed is moving relative to this observer.
The velocity relative to the moving observer is given by
28.19
The moving observer travels with the muon and therefore observes the proper time . The two velocities are
identical; thus,
28.20
We know that . Substituting this equation into the relationship above gives
28.21
Substituting for gives an equation relating the distances measured by different observers.
Length Contraction
Length contraction is the shortening of the measured length of an object moving relative to the observer’s
frame.
28.22
If we measure the length of anything moving relative to our frame, we find its length to be smaller than the proper
length that would be measured if the object were stationary. For example, in the muon’s reference frame, the
distance between the points where it was produced and where it decayed is shorter. Those points are fixed relative
to the Earth but moving relative to the muon. Clouds and other objects are also contracted along the direction of
motion in the muon’s reference frame.
EXAMPLE 28.2
Calculating Length Contraction: The Distance between Stars Contracts when You Travel at
High Velocity
Suppose an astronaut, such as the twin discussed inSimultaneity and Time Dilation, travels so fast that .
PAGE: 1268
1250 28 • Special Relativity
(a) She travels from the Earth to the nearest star system, Alpha Centauri, 4.300 light years (ly) away as measured by
an Earth-bound observer. How far apart are the Earth and Alpha Centauri as measured by the astronaut? (b) In
terms of , what is her velocity relative to the Earth? You may neglect the motion of the Earth relative to the Sun.
(SeeFigure 28.11.)
FIGURE28.11(a) The Earth-bound observer measures the proper distance between the Earth and the Alpha Centauri. (b) The astronaut
observes a length contraction, since the Earth and the Alpha Centauri move relative to her ship. She can travel this shorter distance in a
smaller time (her proper time) without exceeding the speed of light.
Strategy
First note that a light year (ly) is a convenient unit of distance on an astronomical scale—it is the distance light
travels in a year. For part (a), note that the 4.300 ly distance between the Alpha Centauri and the Earth is the proper
distance , because it is measured by an Earth-bound observer to whom both bodies are (approximately)
stationary. To the astronaut, the Earth and the Alpha Centauri are moving by at the same velocity, and so the
distance between them is the contracted length . In part (b), we are given , and so we can find by rearranging
the definition of to express in terms of .
Solution for (a)
1. Identify the knowns. ;
2. Identify the unknown.
3. Choose the appropriate equation.
4. Rearrange the equation to solve for the unknown.
28.23
Solution for (b)
1. Identify the known.
2. Identify the unknown. in terms of
3. Choose the appropriate equation.
4. Rearrange the equation to solve for the unknown.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1269
28.3 • Length Contraction 1251
28.24
Squaring both sides of the equation and rearranging terms gives
28.25
so that
28.26
and
28.27
Taking the square root, we find
28.28
which is rearranged to produce a value for the velocity
28.29
Discussion
First, remember that you should not round off calculations until the final result is obtained, or you could get
erroneous results. This is especially true for special relativity calculations, where the differences might only be
revealed after several decimal places. The relativistic effect is large here ( ), and we see that is
approaching (not equaling) the speed of light. Since the distance as measured by the astronaut is so much smaller,
the astronaut can travel it in much less time in her frame.
People could be sent very large distances (thousands or even millions of light years) and age only a few years on the
way if they traveled at extremely high velocities. But, like emigrants of centuries past, they would leave the Earth
they know forever. Even if they returned, thousands to millions of years would have passed on the Earth, obliterating
most of what now exists. There is also a more serious practical obstacle to traveling at such velocities; immensely
greater energies than classical physics predicts would be needed to achieve such high velocities. This will be
discussed inRelatavistic Energy.
Why don’t we notice length contraction in everyday life? The distance to the grocery shop does not seem to depend
on whether we are moving or not. Examining the equation , we see that at low velocities ( )
the lengths are nearly equal, the classical expectation. But length contraction is real, if not commonly experienced.
For example, a charged particle, like an electron, traveling at relativistic velocity has electric field lines that are
compressed along the direction of motion as seen by a stationary observer. (SeeFigure 28.12.) As the electron
passes a detector, such as a coil of wire, its field interacts much more briefly, an effect observed at particle
accelerators such as the 3 km long Stanford Linear Accelerator (SLAC). In fact, to an electron traveling down the
beam pipe at SLAC, the accelerator and the Earth are all moving by and are length contracted. The relativistic effect
is so great than the accelerator is only 0.5 m long to the electron. It is actually easier to get the electron beam down
the pipe, since the beam does not have to be as precisely aimed to get down a short pipe as it would down one 3 km
long. This, again, is an experimental verification of the Special Theory of Relativity.
PAGE: 1270
1252 28 • Special Relativity
FIGURE28.12The electric field lines of a high-velocity charged particle are compressed along the direction of motion by length
contraction. This produces a different signal when the particle goes through a coil, an experimentally verified effect of length contraction.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
A particle is traveling through the Earth’s atmosphere at a speed of . To an Earth-bound observer, the
distance it travels is 2.50 km. How far does the particle travel in the particle’s frame of reference?
Solution
28.30
28.4 Relativistic Addition of Velocities
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Calculate relativistic velocity addition.
• Explain when relativistic velocity addition should be used instead of classical addition of velocities.
• Calculate relativistic Doppler shift.
FIGURE28.13The total velocity of a kayak, like this one on the Deerfield River in Massachusetts, is its velocity relative to the water as well
as the water’s velocity relative to the riverbank. (credit: abkfenris, Flickr)
If you’ve ever seen a kayak move down a fast-moving river, you know that remaining in the same place would be
hard. The river current pulls the kayak along. Pushing the oars back against the water can move the kayak forward in
the water, but that only accounts for part of the velocity. The kayak’s motion is an example of classical addition of
velocities. In classical physics, velocities add as vectors. The kayak’s velocity is the vector sum of its velocity relative
to the water and the water’s velocity relative to the riverbank.
Classical Velocity Addition
For simplicity, we restrict our consideration of velocity addition to one-dimensional motion. Classically, velocities
add like regular numbers in one-dimensional motion. (SeeFigure 28.14.) Suppose, for example, a girl is riding in a
sled at a speed 1.0 m/s relative to an observer. She throws a snowball first forward, then backward at a speed of 1.5
m/s relative to the sled. We denote direction with plus and minus signs in one dimension; in this example, forward is
positive. Let be the velocity of the sled relative to the Earth, the velocity of the snowball relative to the Earth-
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1271
28.4 • Relativistic Addition of Velocities 1253
bound observer, and the velocity of the snowball relative to the sled.
FIGURE28.14Classically, velocities add like ordinary numbers in one-dimensional motion. Here the girl throws a snowball forward and
then backward from a sled. The velocity of the sled relative to the Earth is . The velocity of the snowball relative to the sled is ,
while its velocity relative to the Earth is . Classically, .
Classical Velocity Addition
28.31
Thus, when the girl throws the snowball forward, . It makes good intuitive sense
that the snowball will head towards the Earth-bound observer faster, because it is thrown forward from a moving
vehicle. When the girl throws the snowball backward, . The minus sign means
the snowball moves away from the Earth-bound observer.
Relativistic Velocity Addition
The second postulate of relativity (verified by extensive experimental observation) says that classical velocity
addition does not apply to light. Imagine a car traveling at night along a straight road, as inFigure 28.15. If classical
velocity addition applied to light, then the light from the car’s headlights would approach the observer on the
sidewalk at a speed . But we know that light will move away from the car at speed relative to the driver of
the car, and light will move towards the observer on the sidewalk at speed , too.
PAGE: 1272
1254 28 • Special Relativity
FIGURE28.15According to experiment and the second postulate of relativity, light from the car’s headlights moves away from the car at
speed and towards the observer on the sidewalk at speed . Classical velocity addition is not valid.
Relativistic Velocity Addition
Either light is an exception, or the classical velocity addition formula only works at low velocities. The latter is
the case. The correct formula for one-dimensionalrelativistic velocity additionis
28.32
where is the relative velocity between two observers, is the velocity of an object relative to one observer, and
is the velocity relative to the other observer. (For ease of visualization, we often choose to measure in our
reference frame, while someone moving at relative to us measures .) Note that the term becomes very
small at low velocities, and gives a result very close to classical velocity addition. As before, we see
that classical velocity addition is an excellent approximation to the correct relativistic formula for small
velocities. No wonder that it seems correct in our experience.
EXAMPLE 28.3
Showing that the Speed of Light towards an Observer is Constant (in a Vacuum): The Speed
of Light is the Speed of Light
Suppose a spaceship heading directly towards the Earth at half the speed of light sends a signal to us on a laser-
produced beam of light. Given that the light leaves the ship at speed as observed from the ship, calculate the
speed at which it approaches the Earth.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1273
28.4 • Relativistic Addition of Velocities 1255
FIGURE28.16
Strategy
Because the light and the spaceship are moving at relativistic speeds, we cannot use simple velocity addition.
Instead, we can determine the speed at which the light approaches the Earth using relativistic velocity addition.
Solution
1. Identify the knowns. ;
2. Identify the unknown.
3. Choose the appropriate equation.
4. Plug the knowns into the equation.
28.33
Discussion
Relativistic velocity addition gives the correct result. Light leaves the ship at speed and approaches the Earth at
speed . The speed of light is independent of the relative motion of source and observer, whether the observer is on
the ship or Earth-bound.
Velocities cannot add to greater than the speed of light, provided that is less than and does not exceed . The
following example illustrates that relativistic velocity addition is not as symmetric as classical velocity addition.
EXAMPLE 28.4
Comparing the Speed of Light towards and away from an Observer: Relativistic Package
Delivery
Suppose the spaceship in the previous example is approaching the Earth at half the speed of light and shoots a
canister at a speed of . (a) At what velocity will an Earth-bound observer see the canister if it is shot directly
towards the Earth? (b) If it is shot directly away from the Earth? (SeeFigure 28.17.)
PAGE: 1274
1256 28 • Special Relativity
FIGURE28.17
Strategy
Because the canister and the spaceship are moving at relativistic speeds, we must determine the speed of the
canister by an Earth-bound observer using relativistic velocity addition instead of simple velocity addition.
Solution for (a)
1. Identify the knowns. ;
2. Identify the unknown.
3. Choose the appropriate equation.
4. Plug the knowns into the equation.
28.34
Solution for (b)
1. Identify the knowns. ;
2. Identify the unknown.
3. Choose the appropriate equation.
4. Plug the knowns into the equation.
28.35
Discussion
The minus sign indicates velocity away from the Earth (in the opposite direction from ), which means the canister is
heading towards the Earth in part (a) and away in part (b), as expected. But relativistic velocities do not add as
simply as they do classically. In part (a), the canister does approach the Earth faster, but not at the simple sum of
. The total velocity is less than you would get classically. And in part (b), the canister moves away from the
Earth at a velocity of , which isfasterthan the you would expect classically. The velocities are not
even symmetric. In part (a) the canister moves faster than the ship relative to the Earth, whereas in part (b) it
moves slower than the ship.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1275
28.4 • Relativistic Addition of Velocities 1257
Doppler Shift
Although the speed of light does not change with relative velocity, the frequencies and wavelengths of light do. First
discussed for sound waves, a Doppler shift occurs in any wave when there is relative motion between source and
observer.
Relativistic Doppler Effects
The observed wavelength of electromagnetic radiation is longer (called a red shift) than that emitted by the
source when the source moves away from the observer and shorter (called a blue shift) when the source moves
towards the observer.
28.36
In the Doppler equation, is the observed wavelength, is the source wavelength, and is the relative velocity
of the source to the observer. The velocity is positive for motion away from an observer and negative for motion
toward an observer. In terms of source frequency and observed frequency, this equation can be written
28.37
Notice that the – and + signs are different than in the wavelength equation.
Career Connection: Astronomer
If you are interested in a career that requires a knowledge of special relativity, there’s probably no better
connection than astronomy. Astronomers must take into account relativistic effects when they calculate
distances, times, and speeds of black holes, galaxies, quasars, and all other astronomical objects. To have a
career in astronomy, you need at least an undergraduate degree in either physics or astronomy, but a Master’s or
doctoral degree is often required. You also need a good background in high-level mathematics.
EXAMPLE 28.5
Calculating a Doppler Shift: Radio Waves from a Receding Galaxy
Suppose a galaxy is moving away from the Earth at a speed . It emits radio waves with a wavelength of
. What wavelength would we detect on the Earth?
Strategy
Because the galaxy is moving at a relativistic speed, we must determine the Doppler shift of the radio waves using
the relativistic Doppler shift instead of the classical Doppler shift.
Solution
1. Identify the knowns. ;
2. Identify the unknown.
3. Choose the appropriate equation.
4. Plug the knowns into the equation.
PAGE: 1276
1258 28 • Special Relativity
28.38
Discussion
Because the galaxy is moving away from the Earth, we expect the wavelengths of radiation it emits to be redshifted.
The wavelength we calculated is 1.70 m, which is redshifted from the original wavelength of 0.525 m.
The relativistic Doppler shift is easy to observe. This equation has everyday applications ranging from Doppler-
shifted radar velocity measurements of transportation to Doppler-radar storm monitoring. In astronomical
observations, the relativistic Doppler shift provides velocity information such as the motion and distance of stars.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
Suppose a space probe moves away from the Earth at a speed . It sends a radio wave message back to the
Earth at a frequency of 1.50 GHz. At what frequency is the message received on the Earth?
Solution
28.39
28.5 Relativistic Momentum
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Calculate relativistic momentum.
• Explain why the only mass it makes sense to talk about is rest mass.
FIGURE28.18Momentum is an important concept for these football players from the University of California at Berkeley and the University
of California at Davis. Players with more mass often have a larger impact because their momentum is larger. For objects moving at
relativistic speeds, the effect is even greater. (credit: John Martinez Pavliga)
In classical physics, momentum is a simple product of mass and velocity. However, we saw in the last section that
when special relativity is taken into account, massive objects have a speed limit. What effect do you think mass and
velocity have on the momentum of objects moving at relativistic speeds?
Momentum is one of the most important concepts in physics. The broadest form of Newton’s second law is stated in
terms of momentum. Momentum is conserved whenever the net external force on a system is zero. This makes
momentum conservation a fundamental tool for analyzing collisions. All ofWork, Energy, and Energy Resourcesis
devoted to momentum, and momentum has been important for many other topics as well, particularly where
collisions were involved. We will see that momentum has the same importance in modern physics. Relativistic
momentum is conserved, and much of what we know about subatomic structure comes from the analysis of
collisions of accelerator-produced relativistic particles.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1277
28.5 • Relativistic Momentum 1259
The first postulate of relativity states that the laws of physics are the same in all inertial frames. Does the law of
conservation of momentum survive this requirement at high velocities? The answer is yes, provided that the
momentum is defined as follows.
Relativistic Momentum
Relativistic momentum is classical momentum multiplied by the relativistic factor .
28.40
where is therest massof the object, is its velocity relative to an observer, and the relativistic factor
28.41
Note that we use for velocity here to distinguish it from relative velocity between observers. Only one observer is
being considered here. With defined in this way, total momentum is conserved whenever the net external
force is zero, just as in classical physics. Again we see that the relativistic quantity becomes virtually the same as the
classical at low velocities. That is, relativistic momentum becomes the classical at low velocities, because
is very nearly equal to 1 at low velocities.
Relativistic momentum has the same intuitive feel as classical momentum. It is greatest for large masses moving at
high velocities, but, because of the factor , relativistic momentum approaches infinity as approaches . (See
Figure 28.19.) This is another indication that an object with mass cannot reach the speed of light. If it did, its
momentum would become infinite, an unreasonable value.
FIGURE28.19Relativistic momentum approaches infinity as the velocity of an object approaches the speed of light.
Misconception Alert: Relativistic Mass and Momentum
The relativistically correct definition of momentum as is sometimes taken to imply that mass varies
with velocity: , particularly in older textbooks. However, note that is the mass of the object as
measured by a person at rest relative to the object. Thus, is defined to be the rest mass, which could be
measured at rest, perhaps using gravity. When a mass is moving relative to an observer, the only way that its
mass can be determined is through collisions or other means in which momentum is involved. Since the mass of
a moving object cannot be determined independently of momentum, the only meaningful mass is rest mass.
Thus, when we use the term mass, assume it to be identical to rest mass.
Relativistic momentum is defined in such a way that the conservation of momentum will hold in all inertial frames.
Whenever the net external force on a system is zero, relativistic momentum is conserved, just as is the case for
classical momentum. This has been verified in numerous experiments.
InRelativistic Energy, the relationship of relativistic momentum to energy is explored. That subject will produce our
PAGE: 1278
1260 28 • Special Relativity
first inkling that objects without mass may also have momentum.
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
What is the momentum of an electron traveling at a speed ? The rest mass of the electron is
.
Solution
28.42
28.6 Relativistic Energy
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Compute total energy of a relativistic object.
• Compute the kinetic energy of a relativistic object.
• Describe rest energy, and explain how it can be converted to other forms.
• Explain why massive particles cannot reach C.
FIGURE28.20The National Spherical Torus Experiment (NSTX) has a fusion reactor in which hydrogen isotopes undergo fusion to produce
helium. In this process, a relatively small mass of fuel is converted into a large amount of energy. (credit: Princeton Plasma Physics
Laboratory)
A tokamak is a form of experimental fusion reactor, which can change mass to energy. Accomplishing this requires
an understanding of relativistic energy. Nuclear reactors are proof of the conservation of relativistic energy.
Conservation of energy is one of the most important laws in physics. Not only does energy have many important
forms, but each form can be converted to any other. We know that classically the total amount of energy in a system
remains constant. Relativistically, energy is still conserved, provided its definition is altered to include the possibility
of mass changing to energy, as in the reactions that occur within a nuclear reactor. Relativistic energy is intentionally
defined so that it will be conserved in all inertial frames, just as is the case for relativistic momentum. As a
consequence, we learn that several fundamental quantities are related in ways not known in classical physics. All of
these relationships are verified by experiment and have fundamental consequences. The altered definition of energy
contains some of the most fundamental and spectacular new insights into nature found in recent history.
Total Energy and Rest Energy
The first postulate of relativity states that the laws of physics are the same in all inertial frames. Einstein showed
that the law of conservation of energy is valid relativistically, if we define energy to include a relativistic factor.
Total Energy
Total energy is defined to be
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1279
28.6 • Relativistic Energy 1261
28.43
where is mass, is the speed of light, , and is the velocity of the mass relative to an observer.
There are many aspects of the total energy that we will discuss—among them are how kinetic and potential
energies are included in , and how is related to relativistic momentum. But first, note that at rest, total
energy is not zero. Rather, when , we have , and an object has rest energy.
Rest Energy
Rest energyis
28.44
This is the correct form of Einstein’s most famous equation, which for the first time showed that energy is related to
the mass of an object at rest. For example, if energy is stored in the object, its rest mass increases. This also implies
that mass can be destroyed to release energy. The implications of these first two equations regarding relativistic
energy are so broad that they were not completely recognized for some years after Einstein published them in 1907,
nor was the experimental proof that they are correct widely recognized at first. Einstein, it should be noted, did
understand and describe the meanings and implications of his theory.
EXAMPLE 28.6
Calculating Rest Energy: Rest Energy is Very Large
Calculate the rest energy of a 1.00-g mass.
Strategy
One gram is a small mass—less than half the mass of a penny. We can multiply this mass, in SI units, by the speed of
light squared to find the equivalent rest energy.
Solution
1. Identify the knowns. ;
2. Identify the unknown.
3. Choose the appropriate equation.
4. Plug the knowns into the equation.
28.45
5. Convert units.
Noting that , we see the rest mass energy is
28.46
Discussion
This is an enormous amount of energy for a 1.00-g mass. We do not notice this energy, because it is generally not
available. Rest energy is large because the speed of light is a large number and is a very large number, so that
is huge for any macroscopic mass. The rest mass energy for 1.00 g is about twice the energy
released by the Hiroshima atomic bomb and about 10,000 times the kinetic energy of a large aircraft carrier. If a way
can be found to convert rest mass energy into some other form (and all forms of energy can be converted into one
another), then huge amounts of energy can be obtained from the destruction of mass.
PAGE: 1280
1262 28 • Special Relativity
Today, the practical applications ofthe conversion of mass into another form of energy, such as in nuclear weapons
and nuclear power plants, are well known. But examples also existed when Einstein first proposed the correct form
of relativistic energy, and he did describe some of them. Nuclear radiation had been discovered in the previous
decade, and it had been a mystery as to where its energy originated. The explanation was that, in certain nuclear
processes, a small amount of mass is destroyed and energy is released and carried by nuclear radiation. But the
amount of mass destroyed is so small that it is difficult to detect that any is missing. Although Einstein proposed this
as the source of energy in the radioactive salts then being studied, it was many years before there was broad
recognition that mass could be and, in fact, commonly is converted to energy. (SeeFigure 28.21.)
FIGURE28.21The Sun (a) and the Susquehanna Steam Electric Station (b) both convert mass into energy—the Sun via nuclear fusion, the
electric station via nuclear fission. (credits: (a) NASA/Goddard Space Flight Center, Scientific Visualization Studio; (b) U.S. government)
Because of the relationship of rest energy to mass, we now consider mass to be a form of energy rather than
something separate. There had not even been a hint of this prior to Einstein’s work. Such conversion is now known
to be the source of the Sun’s energy, the energy of nuclear decay, and even the source of energy keeping Earth’s
interior hot.
Stored Energy and Potential Energy
What happens to energy stored in an object at rest, such as the energy put into a battery by charging it, or the energy
stored in a toy gun’s compressed spring? The energy input becomes part of the total energy of the object and, thus,
increases its rest mass. All stored and potential energy becomes mass in a system. Why is it we don’t ordinarily
notice this? In fact, conservation of mass (meaning total mass is constant) was one of the great laws verified by
19th-century science. Why was it not noticed to be incorrect? The following example helps answer these questions.
EXAMPLE 28.7
Calculating Rest Mass: A Small Mass Increase due to Energy Input
A car battery is rated to be able to move 600 ampere-hours of charge at 12.0 V. (a) Calculate the increase in
rest mass of such a battery when it is taken from being fully depleted to being fully charged. (b) What percent
increase is this, given the battery’s mass is 20.0 kg?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1281
28.6 • Relativistic Energy 1263
Strategy
In part (a), we first must find the energy stored in the battery, which equals what the battery can supply in the form
of electrical potential energy. Since , we have to calculate the charge in , which is the product
of the current and the time . We then multiply the result by 12.0 V. We can then calculate the battery’s increase in
mass using . Part (b) is a simple ratio converted to a percentage.
Solution for (a)
1. Identify the knowns. ; ;
2. Identify the unknown.
3. Choose the appropriate equation.
4. Rearrange the equation to solve for the unknown.
5. Plug the knowns into the equation.
28.47
Write amperes A as coulombs per second (C/s), and convert hours to seconds.
28.48
Using the conversion , we can write the mass as
Solution for (b)
1. Identify the knowns. ;
2. Identify the unknown. % change
3. Choose the appropriate equation.
4. Plug the knowns into the equation.
28.49
Discussion
Both the actual increase in mass and the percent increase are very small, since energy is divided by , a very large
number. We would have to be able to measure the mass of the battery to a precision of a billionth of a percent, or 1
part in , to notice this increase. It is no wonder that the mass variation is not readily observed. In fact, this
change in mass is so small that we may question how you could verify it is real. The answer is found in nuclear
processes in which the percentage of mass destroyed is large enough to be measured. The mass of the fuel of a
nuclear reactor, for example, is measurably smaller when its energy has been used. In that case, stored energy has
been released (converted mostly to heat and electricity) and the rest mass has decreased. This is also the case
when you use the energy stored in a battery, except that the stored energy is much greater in nuclear processes,
making the change in mass measurable in practice as well as in theory.
PAGE: 1282
1264 28 • Special Relativity
Kinetic Energy and the Ultimate Speed Limit
Kinetic energy is energy of motion. Classically, kinetic energy has the familiar expression . The relativistic
expression for kinetic energy is obtained from the work-energy theorem. This theorem states that the net work on a
system goes into kinetic energy. If our system starts from rest, then the work-energy theorem is
28.50
Relativistically, at rest we have rest energy . The work increases this to the total energy . Thus,
28.51
Relativistically, we have .
Relativistic Kinetic Energy
Relativistic kinetic energyis
28.52
When motionless, we have and
28.53
so that at rest, as expected. But the expression for relativistic kinetic energy (such as total energy and
rest energy) does not look much like the classical . To show that the classical expression for kinetic energy is
obtained at low velocities, we note that the binomial expansion for at low velocities gives
28.54
A binomial expansion is a way of expressing an algebraic quantity as a sum of an infinite series of terms. In some
cases, as in the limit of small velocity here, most terms are very small. Thus the expression derived for here is not
exact, but it is a very accurate approximation. Thus, at low velocities,
28.55
Entering this into the expression for relativistic kinetic energy gives
28.56
So, in fact, relativistic kinetic energy does become the same as classical kinetic energy when .
It is even more interesting to investigate what happens to kinetic energy when the velocity of an object approaches
the speed of light. We know that becomes infinite as approaches , so that KE also becomes infinite as the
rel
velocity approaches the speed of light. (SeeFigure 28.22.) An infinite amount of work (and, hence, an infinite
amount of energy input) is required to accelerate a mass to the speed of light.
The Speed of Light
No object with mass can attain the speed of light.
So the speed of light is the ultimate speed limit for any particle having mass. All of this is consistent with the fact
that velocities less than always add to less than . Both the relativistic form for kinetic energy and the ultimate
speed limit being have been confirmed in detail in numerous experiments. No matter how much energy is put into
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1283
28.6 • Relativistic Energy 1265
accelerating a mass, its velocity can only approach—not reach—the speed of light.
FIGURE28.22This graph of versus velocity shows how kinetic energy approaches infinity as velocity approaches the speed of light.
It is thus not possible for an object having mass to reach the speed of light. Also shown is , the classical kinetic energy, which is
similar to relativistic kinetic energy at low velocities. Note that much more energy is required to reach high velocities than predicted
classically.
EXAMPLE 28.8
Comparing Kinetic Energy: Relativistic Energy Versus Classical Kinetic Energy
An electron has a velocity . (a) Calculate the kinetic energy in MeV of the electron. (b) Compare this with
the classical value for kinetic energy at this velocity. (The mass of an electron is .)
Strategy
The expression for relativistic kinetic energy is always correct, but for (a) it must be used since the velocity is highly
relativistic (close to ). First, we will calculate the relativistic factor , and then use it to determine the relativistic
kinetic energy. For (b), we will calculate the classical kinetic energy (which would be close to the relativistic value if
were less than a few percent of ) and see that it is not the same.
Solution for (a)
1. Identify the knowns. ;
2. Identify the unknown.
3. Choose the appropriate equation.
4. Plug the knowns into the equation.
First calculate . We will carry extra digits because this is an intermediate calculation.
28.57
Next, we use this value to calculate the kinetic energy.
28.58
5. Convert units.
PAGE: 1284
1266 28 • Special Relativity
28.59
Solution for (b)
1. List the knowns. ;
2. List the unknown.
3. Choose the appropriate equation.
4. Plug the knowns into the equation.
28.60
5. Convert units.
28.61
Discussion
As might be expected, since the velocity is 99.0% of the speed of light, the classical kinetic energy is significantly off
from the correct relativistic value. Note also that the classical value is much smaller than the relativistic value. In
fact, here. This is some indication of how difficult it is to get a mass moving close to the speed
of light. Much more energy is required than predicted classically. Some people interpret this extra energy as going
into increasing the mass of the system, but, as discussed inRelativistic Momentum, this cannot be verified
unambiguously. What is certain is that ever-increasing amounts of energy are needed to get the velocity of a mass a
little closer to that of light. An energy of 3 MeV is a very small amount for an electron, and it can be achieved with
present-day particle accelerators. SLAC, for example, can accelerate electrons to over .
Is there any point in getting a little closer to c than 99.0% or 99.9%? The answer is yes. We learn a great deal by
doing this. The energy that goes into a high-velocity mass can be converted to any other form, including into entirely
new masses. (SeeFigure 28.23.) Most of what we know about the substructure of matter and the collection of exotic
short-lived particles in nature has been learned this way. Particles are accelerated to extremely relativistic energies
and made to collide with other particles, producing totally new species of particles. Patterns in the characteristics of
these previously unknown particles hint at a basic substructure for all matter. These particles and some of their
characteristics will be covered inParticle Physics.
FIGURE28.23The Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory, near Batavia, Illinois, was a subatomic particle collider that accelerated protons
and antiprotons to attain energies up to 1 Tev (a trillion electronvolts). The circular ponds near the rings were built to dissipate waste heat.
This accelerator was shut down in September 2011. (credit: Fermilab, Reidar Hahn)
Relativistic Energy and Momentum
We know classically that kinetic energy and momentum are related to each other, since
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1285
28.6 • Relativistic Energy 1267
28.62
Relativistically, we can obtain a relationship between energy and momentum by algebraically manipulating their
definitions. This produces
28.63
where is the relativistic total energy and is the relativistic momentum. This relationship between relativistic
energy and relativistic momentum is more complicated than the classical, but we can gain some interesting new
insights by examining it. First, total energy is related to momentum and rest mass. At rest, momentum is zero, and
the equation gives the total energy to be the rest energy (so this equation is consistent with the discussion of
rest energy above). However, as the mass is accelerated, its momentum increases, thus increasing the total
energy. At sufficiently high velocities, the rest energy term becomes negligible compared with the
momentum term ; thus, at extremely relativistic velocities.
If we consider momentum to be distinct from mass, we can determine the implications of the equation
for a particle that has no mass. If we take to be zero in this equation, then , or
. Massless particles have this momentum. There are several massless particles found in nature, including
photons (these are quanta of electromagnetic radiation). Another implication is that a massless particle must travel
at speed and only at speed . While it is beyond the scope of this text to examine the relationship in the equation
in detail, we can see that the relationship has important implications in special relativity.
Problem-Solving Strategies for Relativity
1. Examine the situation to determine that it is necessary to use relativity. Relativistic effects are related to
, the quantitative relativistic factor. If is very close to 1, then relativistic effects are small and
differ very little from the usually easier classical calculations.
2. Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem (identify the unknowns).
3. Make a list of what is given or can be inferred from the problem as stated (identify the knowns).Look in
particular for information on relative velocity .
4. Make certain you understand the conceptual aspects of the problem before making any calculations.
Decide, for example, which observer sees time dilated or length contracted before plugging into equations.
If you have thought about who sees what, who is moving with the event being observed, who sees proper
time, and so on, you will find it much easier to determine if your calculation is reasonable.
5. Determine the primary type of calculation to be done to find the unknowns identified above.You will find the
section summary helpful in determining whether a length contraction, relativistic kinetic energy, or some
other concept is involved.
6. Do not round off during the calculation.As noted in the text, you must often perform your calculations to
many digits to see the desired effect. You may round off at the very end of the problem, but do not use a
rounded number in a subsequent calculation.
7. Check the answer to see if it is reasonable: Does it make sense?This may be more difficult for relativity,
since we do not encounter it directly. But you can look for velocities greater than or relativistic effects that
are in the wrong direction (such as a time contraction where a dilation was expected).
CHECK YOUR UNDERSTANDING
A photon decays into an electron-positron pair. What is the kinetic energy of the electron if its speed is ?
PAGE: 1286
1268 28 • Special Relativity
Solution
28.64
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1287
28 • Glossary 1269
Glossary
classical velocity addition the method of adding relativistic kinetic energy the kinetic energy of an
velocities when ; velocities add like regular object moving at relativistic speeds:
numbers in one-dimensional motion: , , where
where is the velocity between two observers, is
the velocity of an object relative to one observer,
relativistic momentum , the momentum of an
and is the velocity relative to the other observer
object moving at relativistic velocity; ,
first postulate of special relativity the idea that the
where is the rest mass of the object, is its
laws of physics are the same and can be stated in
velocity relative to an observer, and the relativistic
their simplest form in all inertial frames of reference
factor
inertial frame of reference a reference frame in
which a body at rest remains at rest and a body in
motion moves at a constant speed in a straight line relativistic velocity addition the method of adding
unless acted on by an outside force velocities of an object moving at a relativistic speed:
length contraction , the shortening of the , where is the relative velocity between
measured length of an object moving relative to the
two observers, is the velocity of an object relative
observer’s frame:
to one observer, and is the velocity relative to the
Michelson-Morley experiment an investigation other observer
performed in 1887 that proved that the speed of relativity the study of how different observers
light in a vacuum is the same in all frames of measure the same event
reference from which it is viewed rest energy the energy stored in an object at rest:
proper length ; the distance between two points
measured by an observer who is at rest relative to rest mass the mass of an object as measured by a
both of the points; Earth-bound observers measure person at rest relative to the object
proper length when measuring the distance second postulate of special relativity the idea that
between two points that are stationary relative to the speed of light is a constant, independent of the
the Earth source
proper time . the time measured by an observer special relativity the theory that, in an inertial frame
at rest relative to the event being observed: of reference, the motion of an object is relative to
the frame from which it is viewed or measured
, where
time dilation the phenomenon of time passing slower
to an observer who is moving relative to another
relativistic Doppler effects a change in wavelength observer
of radiation that is moving relative to the observer; total energy defined as , where
the wavelength of the radiation is longer (called a
red shift) than that emitted by the source when the
source moves away from the observer and shorter
twin paradox this asks why a twin traveling at a
(called a blue shift) when the source moves toward
relativistic speed away and then back towards the
the observer; the shifted wavelength is described by
Earth ages less than the Earth-bound twin. The
the equation where is the premise to the paradox is faulty because the
traveling twin is accelerating, and special relativity
observed wavelength, is the source wavelength,
does not apply to accelerating frames of reference
and is the velocity of the source to the observer
Section Summary
28.1Einstein’s Postulates includes accelerated relative motion and gravity.
Modern relativity is correct in all circumstances
• Relativity is the study of how different observers
and, in the limit of low velocity and weak
measure the same event.
gravitation, gives the same predictions as classical
• Modern relativity is divided into two parts. Special
relativity.
relativity deals with observers who are in uniform
• An inertial frame of reference is a reference frame
(unaccelerated) motion, whereas general relativity
in which a body at rest remains at rest and a body
PAGE: 1288
1270 28 • Section Summary
in motion moves at a constant speed in a straight length is the distance between two points
line unless acted on by an outside force. measured by an observer who is at rest relative to
• Modern relativity is based on Einstein’s two both of the points. Earth-bound observers
postulates. The first postulate of special relativity measure proper length when measuring the
is the idea that the laws of physics are the same distance between two points that are stationary
and can be stated in their simplest form in all relative to the Earth.
inertial frames of reference. The second postulate • Length contraction is the shortening of the
of special relativity is the idea that the speed of measured length of an object moving relative to
light is a constant, independent of the relative the observer’s frame:
motion of the source.
• The Michelson-Morley experiment demonstrated
that the speed of light in a vacuum is independent
of the motion of the Earth about the Sun. 28.4Relativistic Addition of Velocities
28.2Simultaneity And Time Dilation
• With classical velocity addition, velocities add like
regular numbers in one-dimensional motion:
• Two events are defined to be simultaneous if an
, where is the velocity between two
observer measures them as occurring at the same
observers, is the velocity of an object relative to
time. They are not necessarily simultaneous to all
one observer, and is the velocity relative to the
observers—simultaneity is not absolute.
other observer.
• Time dilation is the phenomenon of time passing
• Velocities cannot add to be greater than the speed
slower for an observer who is moving relative to
of light. Relativistic velocity addition describes the
another observer.
velocities of an object moving at a relativistic
• Observers moving at a relative velocity do not
speed:
measure the same elapsed time for an event.
Proper time is the time measured by an
observer at rest relative to the event being
observed. Proper time is related to the time • An observer of electromagnetic radiation sees
measured by an Earth-bound observer by the relativistic Doppler effectsif the source of the
equation radiation is moving relative to the observer. The
wavelength of the radiation is longer (called a red
shift) than that emitted by the source when the
source moves away from the observer and shorter
where (called a blue shift) when the source moves toward
the observer. The shifted wavelength is described
by the equation
• The equation relating proper time and time
measured by an Earth-bound observer implies that is the observed wavelength, is the source
relative velocity cannot exceed the speed of light. wavelength, and is the relative velocity of the
• The twin paradox asks why a twin traveling at a source to the observer.
relativistic speed away and then back towards the
28.5Relativistic Momentum
Earth ages less than the Earth-bound twin. The
premise to the paradox is faulty because the • The law of conservation of momentum is valid
traveling twin is accelerating. Special relativity whenever the net external force is zero and for
does not apply to accelerating frames of reference. relativistic momentum. Relativistic momentum is
• Time dilation is usually negligible at low relative classical momentum multiplied by the relativistic
velocities, but it does occur, and it has been factor .
verified by experiment. • , where is the rest mass of the object,
is its velocity relative to an observer, and the
28.3Length Contraction
relativistic factor .
• All observers agree upon relative speed.
• Distance depends on an observer’s motion. Proper
• At low velocities, relativistic momentum is
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1289
28 • Conceptual Questions 1271
equivalent to classical momentum. decrease in mass of an object because the change
• Relativistic momentum approaches infinity as in mass is so small for a large increase in energy.
approaches . This implies that an object with • The relativistic work-energy theorem is
mass cannot reach the speed of light. .
• Relativistic momentum is conserved, just as • Relativistically, , where is the
classical momentum is conserved. relativistic kinetic energy.
• Relativistic kinetic energy is ,
28.6Relativistic Energy
where . At low velocities, relativistic
• Relativistic energy is conserved as long as we
define it to include the possibility of mass
kinetic energy reduces to classical kinetic energy.
changing to energy.
• No object with mass can attain the speed of light
• Total Energy is defined as: , where
because an infinite amount of work and an infinite
.
amount of energy input is required to accelerate a
mass to the speed of light.
• Rest energy is , meaning that mass is a • The equation relates the
form of energy. If energy is stored in an object, its relativistic total energy and the relativistic
mass increases. Mass can be destroyed to release momentum . At extremely high velocities, the
energy. rest energy becomes negligible, and .
• We do not ordinarily notice the increase or
Conceptual Questions
28.1Einstein’s Postulates 8. Relativistic effects such as time dilation and length
contraction are present for cars and airplanes. Why
1. Which of Einstein’s postulates of special relativity
do these effects seem strange to us?
includes a concept that does not fit with the ideas
9. Suppose an astronaut is moving relative to the
of classical physics? Explain.
Earth at a significant fraction of the speed of light.
2. Is Earth an inertial frame of reference? Is the Sun?
(a) Does he observe the rate of his clocks to have
Justify your response.
slowed? (b) What change in the rate of Earth-bound
3. When you are flying in a commercial jet, it may
clocks does he see? (c) Does his ship seem to him
appear to you that the airplane is stationary and the
to shorten? (d) What about the distance between
Earth is moving beneath you. Is this point of view
stars that lie on lines parallel to his motion? (e) Do
valid? Discuss briefly.
he and an Earth-bound observer agree on his
velocity relative to the Earth?
28.2Simultaneity And Time Dilation
4. Does motion affect the rate of a clock as measured 28.4Relativistic Addition of Velocities
by an observer moving with it? Does motion affect
10. Explain the meaning of the terms “red shift” and
how an observer moving relative to a clock
“blue shift” as they relate to the relativistic
measures its rate?
Doppler effect.
5. To whom does the elapsed time for a process seem
11. What happens to the relativistic Doppler effect
to be longer, an observer moving relative to the
when relative velocity is zero? Is this the expected
process or an observer moving with the process?
result?
Which observer measures proper time?
12. Is the relativistic Doppler effect consistent with
6. How could you travel far into the future without
the classical Doppler effect in the respect that
aging significantly? Could this method also allow
is larger for motion away?
you to travel into the past?
13. All galaxies farther away than about
exhibit a red shift in their emitted light that is
28.3Length Contraction
proportional to distance, with those farther and
7. To whom does an object seem greater in length, an farther away having progressively greater red
observer moving with the object or an observer shifts. What does this imply, assuming that the
moving relative to the object? Which observer only source of red shift is relative motion? (Hint: At
measures the object’s proper length? these large distances, it is space itself that is
expanding, but the effect on light is the same.)
PAGE: 1290
1272 28 • Problems & Exercises
28.5Relativistic Momentum 19. The mass of the fuel in a nuclear reactor
decreases by an observable amount as it puts out
14. How does modern relativity modify the law of
energy. Is the same true for the coal and oxygen
conservation of momentum?
combined in a conventional power plant? If so, is
15. Is it possible for an external force to be acting on a
this observable in practice for the coal and
system and relativistic momentum to be
oxygen? Explain.
conserved? Explain.
20. We know that the velocity of an object with mass
has an upper limit of . Is there an upper limit on
28.6Relativistic Energy
its momentum? Its energy? Explain.
16. How are the classical laws of conservation of 21. Given the fact that light travels at , can it have
energy and conservation of mass modified by mass? Explain.
modern relativity? 22. If you use an Earth-based telescope to project a
17. What happens to the mass of water in a pot when laser beam onto the Moon, you can move the spot
it cools, assuming no molecules escape or are across the Moon’s surface at a velocity greater
added? Is this observable in practice? Explain. than the speed of light. Does this violate modern
18. Consider a thought experiment. You place an relativity? (Note that light is being sent from the
expanded balloon of air on weighing scales Earth to the Moon, not across the surface of the
outside in the early morning. The balloon stays on Moon.)
the scales and you are able to measure changes in
its mass. Does the mass of the balloon change as
the day progresses? Discuss the difficulties in
carrying out this experiment.
Problems & Exercises
28.2Simultaneity And Time Dilation 8. If relativistic effects are to be less than 3%, then
must be less than 1.03. At what relative velocity is
1. (a) What is if ? (b) If ?
?
2. (a) What is if ? (b) If ?
9. (a) At what relative velocity is ? (b) At what
3. Particles called -mesons are produced by
relative velocity is ?
accelerator beams. If these particles travel at
10. (a) At what relative velocity is ? (b) At
and live when at rest
what relative velocity is ?
relative to an observer, how long do they live as
11. Unreasonable Results
viewed in the laboratory?
(a) Find the value of for the following situation.
4. Suppose a particle called a kaon is created by
An Earth-bound observer measures 23.9 h to have
cosmic radiation striking the atmosphere. It moves
passed while signals from a high-velocity space
by you at , and it lives when at
probe indicate that have passed on board.
rest relative to an observer. How long does it live as
(b) What is unreasonable about this result? (c)
you observe it?
Which assumptions are unreasonable or
5. A neutral -meson is a particle that can be created
inconsistent?
by accelerator beams. If one such particle lives
as measured in the laboratory, and
28.3Length Contraction
when at rest relative to an
observer, what is its velocity relative to the 12. A spaceship, 200 m long as seen on board, moves
laboratory? by the Earth at . What is its length as
6. A neutron lives 900 s when at rest relative to an measured by an Earth-bound observer?
observer. How fast is the neutron moving relative to 13. How fast would a 6.0 m-long sports car have to be
an observer who measures its life span to be 2065 going past you in order for it to appear only 5.5 m
s? long?
7. If relativistic effects are to be less than 1%, then
must be less than 1.01. At what relative velocity is
?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1291
28 • Problems & Exercises 1273
14. (a) How far does the muon inExample 28.1travel 23. (a) Suppose the speed of light were only
according to the Earth-bound observer? (b) How . A jet fighter moving toward a target on
far does it travel as viewed by an observer moving the ground at shoots bullets, each having
with it? Base your calculation on its velocity a muzzle velocity of . What are the
relative to the Earth and the time it lives (proper bullets’ velocity relative to the target? (b) If the
time). (c) Verify that these two distances are speed of light was this small, would you observe
related through length contraction . relativistic effects in everyday life? Discuss.
15. (a) How long would the muon inExample 28.1 24. If a galaxy moving away from the Earth has a
have lived as observed on the Earth if its velocity speed of and emits light
was ? (b) How far would it have traveled characteristic of hydrogen (the most common
as observed on the Earth? (c) What distance is this element in the universe). (a) What wavelength
in the muon’s frame? would we observe on the Earth? (b) What type of
16. (a) How long does it take the astronaut inExample electromagnetic radiation is this? (c) Why is the
28.2to travel 4.30 ly at (as measured by speed of the Earth in its orbit negligible here?
the Earth-bound observer)? (b) How long does it 25. A space probe speeding towards the nearest star
take according to the astronaut? (c) Verify that moves at and sends radio information at a
these two times are related through time dilation broadcast frequency of 1.00 GHz. What frequency
with as given. is received on the Earth?
17. (a) How fast would an athlete need to be running 26. If two spaceships are heading directly towards
for a 100-m race to look 100 yd long? (b) Is the each other at , at what speed must a
answer consistent with the fact that relativistic canister be shot from the first ship to approach the
effects are difficult to observe in ordinary other at as seen by the second ship?
circumstances? Explain. 27. Two planets are on a collision course, heading
18. Unreasonable Results directly towards each other at . A spaceship
(a) Find the value of for the following situation. sent from one planet approaches the second at
An astronaut measures the length of her as seen by the second planet. What is the
spaceship to be 25.0 m, while an Earth-bound velocity of the ship relative to the first planet?
observer measures it to be 100 m. (b) What is 28. When a missile is shot from one spaceship
unreasonable about this result? (c) Which towards another, it leaves the first at and
assumptions are unreasonable or inconsistent? approaches the other at . What is the
19. Unreasonable Results relative velocity of the two ships?
A spaceship is heading directly toward the Earth at 29. What is the relative velocity of two spaceships if
a velocity of . The astronaut on board one fires a missile at the other at and the
claims that he can send a canister toward the other observes it to approach at ?
Earth at relative to the Earth. (a) Calculate 30. Near the center of our galaxy, hydrogen gas is
the velocity the canister must have relative to the moving directly away from us in its orbit about a
spaceship. (b) What is unreasonable about this black hole. We receive 1900 nm electromagnetic
result? (c) Which assumptions are unreasonable radiation and know that it was 1875 nm when
or inconsistent? emitted by the hydrogen gas. What is the speed of
the gas?
28.4Relativistic Addition of Velocities 31. A highway patrol officer uses a device that
measures the speed of vehicles by bouncing radar
20. Suppose a spaceship heading straight towards the
off them and measuring the Doppler shift. The
Earth at can shoot a canister at
outgoing radar has a frequency of 100 GHz and
relative to the ship. (a) What is the velocity of the
the returning echo has a frequency 15.0 kHz
canister relative to the Earth, if it is shot directly at
higher. What is the velocity of the vehicle? Note
the Earth? (b) If it is shot directly away from the
that there are two Doppler shifts in echoes. Be
Earth?
certain not to round off until the end of the
21. Repeat the previous problem with the ship
problem, because the effect is small.
heading directly away from the Earth.
32. Prove that for any relative velocity between two
22. If a spaceship is approaching the Earth at
observers, a beam of light sent from one to the
and a message capsule is sent toward it at
other will approach at speed (provided that is
relative to the Earth, what is the speed of the
less than , of course).
capsule relative to the ship?
PAGE: 1292
1274 28 • Problems & Exercises
33. Show that for any relative velocity between two 28.6Relativistic Energy
observers, a beam of light projected by one
43. What is the rest energy of an electron, given its
directly away from the other will move away at the
mass is ? Give your answer in
speed of light (provided that is less than , of
joules and MeV.
course).
44. Find the rest energy in joules and MeV of a proton,
34. (a) All but the closest galaxies are receding from
given its mass is .
our own Milky Way Galaxy. If a galaxy
45. If the rest energies of a proton and a neutron (the
ly away is receding from us at
two constituents of nuclei) are 938.3 and 939.6
0. , at what velocity relative to us must we
MeV respectively, what is the difference in their
send an exploratory probe to approach the other
masses in kilograms?
galaxy at , as measured from that galaxy?
46. The Big Bang that began the universe is estimated
(b) How long will it take the probe to reach the
to have released of energy. How many stars
other galaxy as measured from the Earth? You
could half this energy create, assuming the
may assume that the velocity of the other galaxy
average star’s mass is ?
remains constant. (c) How long will it then take for
47. A supernova explosion of a star
a radio signal to be beamed back? (All of this is
possible in principle, but not practical.) produces of energy. (a) How many
kilograms of mass are converted to energy in the
28.5Relativistic Momentum explosion? (b) What is the ratio of mass
destroyed to the original mass of the star?
35. Find the momentum of a helium nucleus having a 48. (a) Using data fromTable 7.1, calculate the mass
mass of that is moving at . converted to energy by the fission of 1.00 kg of
36. What is the momentum of an electron traveling at uranium. (b) What is the ratio of mass destroyed to
? the original mass, ?
37. (a) Find the momentum of a 49. (a) Using data fromTable 7.1, calculate the
asteroid heading towards the Earth at . amount of mass converted to energy by the fusion
(b) Find the ratio of this momentum to the of 1.00 kg of hydrogen. (b) What is the ratio of
classical momentum. (Hint: Use the mass destroyed to the original mass, ? (c)
approximation that at low How does this compare with for the fission
velocities.) of 1.00 kg of uranium?
38. (a) What is the momentum of a 2000 kg satellite 50. There is approximately of energy available
orbiting at 4.00 km/s? (b) Find the ratio of this from fusion of hydrogen in the world’s oceans. (a)
momentum to the classical momentum. (Hint: Use If of this energy were utilized, what would
the approximation that at low be the decrease in mass of the oceans? Assume
velocities.) that 0.08% of the mass of a water molecule is
39. What is the velocity of an electron that has a converted to energy during the fusion of hydrogen.
momentum of ? Note that (b) How great a volume of water does this
you must calculate the velocity to at least four correspond to? (c) Comment on whether this is a
digits to see the difference from . significant fraction of the total mass of the oceans.
40. Find the velocity of a proton that has a momentum 51. A muon has a rest mass energy of 105.7 MeV, and
of it decays into an electron and a massless particle.
41. (a) Calculate the speed of a particle of (a) If all the lost mass is converted into the
dust that has the same momentum as a proton electron’s kinetic energy, find for the electron.
moving at . (b) What does the small speed (b) What is the electron’s velocity?
tell us about the mass of a proton compared to 52. A -meson is a particle that decays into a muon
even a tiny amount of macroscopic matter? and a massless particle. The -meson has a rest
42. (a) Calculate for a proton that has a momentum mass energy of 139.6 MeV, and the muon has a
of (b) What is its speed? Such rest mass energy of 105.7 MeV. Suppose the
protons form a rare component of cosmic -meson is at rest and all of the missing mass
radiation with uncertain origins. goes into the muon’s kinetic energy. How fast will
the muon move?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1293
28 • Problems & Exercises 1275
53. (a) Calculate the relativistic kinetic energy of a 63. (a) Using data fromTable 7.1, find the mass
1000-kg car moving at 30.0 m/s if the speed of destroyed when the energy in a barrel of crude oil
light were only 45.0 m/s. (b) Find the ratio of the is released. (b) Given these barrels contain 200
relativistic kinetic energy to classical. liters and assuming the density of crude oil is
54. Alpha decay is nuclear decay in which a helium , what is the ratio of mass destroyed to
nucleus is emitted. If the helium nucleus has a original mass, ?
mass of and is given 5.00 MeV of 64. (a) Calculate the energy released by the
kinetic energy, what is its velocity? destruction of 1.00 kg of mass. (b) How many
55. (a) Beta decay is nuclear decay in which an kilograms could be lifted to a 10.0 km height by
electron is emitted. If the electron is given 0.750 this amount of energy?
MeV of kinetic energy, what is its velocity? (b) 65. A Van de Graaff accelerator utilizes a 50.0 MV
Comment on how the high velocity is consistent potential difference to accelerate charged
with the kinetic energy as it compares to the rest particles such as protons. (a) What is the velocity
mass energy of the electron. of a proton accelerated by such a potential? (b) An
56. A positron is an antimatter version of the electron, electron?
having exactly the same mass. When a positron 66. Suppose you use an average of of
and an electron meet, they annihilate, converting electric energy per month in your home. (a) How
all of their mass into energy. (a) Find the energy long would 1.00 g of mass converted to electric
released, assuming negligible kinetic energy energy with an efficiency of 38.0% last you? (b)
before the annihilation. (b) If this energy is given How many homes could be supplied at the
to a proton in the form of kinetic energy, what is its per month rate for one year by the
velocity? (c) If this energy is given to another energy from the described mass conversion?
electron in the form of kinetic energy, what is its 67. (a) A nuclear power plant converts energy from
velocity? nuclear fission into electricity with an efficiency of
57. What is the kinetic energy in MeV of a -meson 35.0%. How much mass is destroyed in one year
that lives as measured in the to produce a continuous 1000 MW of electric
laboratory, and when at rest power? (b) Do you think it would be possible to
relative to an observer, given that its rest energy is observe this mass loss if the total mass of the fuel
135 MeV? is ?
58. Find the kinetic energy in MeV of a neutron with a 68. Nuclear-powered rockets were researched for
measured life span of 2065 s, given its rest energy some years before safety concerns became
is 939.6 MeV, and rest life span is 900s. paramount. (a) What fraction of a rocket’s mass
59. (a) Show that . This means would have to be destroyed to get it into a low
that at large velocities . (b) Is Earth orbit, neglecting the decrease in gravity?
when , as for the astronaut discussed in (Assume an orbital altitude of 250 km, and
the twin paradox? calculate both the kinetic energy (classical) and
60. One cosmic ray neutron has a velocity of the gravitational potential energy needed.) (b) If
relative to the Earth. (a) What is the neutron’s total the ship has a mass of (100 tons),
energy in MeV? (b) Find its momentum. (c) Is what total yield nuclear explosion in tons of TNT is
in this situation? Discuss in terms of the needed?
equation given in part (a) of the previous problem. 69. The Sun produces energy at a rate of
61. What is for a proton having a mass energy of W by the fusion of hydrogen. (a) How many
938.3 MeV accelerated through an effective kilograms of hydrogen undergo fusion each
potential of 1.0 TV (teravolt) at Fermilab outside second? (b) If the Sun is 90.0% hydrogen and half
Chicago? of this can undergo fusion before the Sun changes
62. (a) What is the effective accelerating potential for character, how long could it produce energy at its
electrons at the Stanford Linear Accelerator, if current rate? (c) How many kilograms of mass is
for them? (b) What is their total the Sun losing per second? (d) What fraction of its
energy (nearly the same as kinetic in this case) in mass will it have lost in the time found in part (b)?
GeV?
PAGE: 1294
1276 28 • Problems & Exercises
70. Unreasonable Results 72. Construct Your Own Problem
A proton has a mass of . A Consider an astronaut traveling to another star at
physicist measures the proton’s total energy to be a relativistic velocity. Construct a problem in
50.0 MeV. (a) What is the proton’s kinetic energy? which you calculate the time for the trip as
(b) What is unreasonable about this result? (c) observed on the Earth and as observed by the
Which assumptions are unreasonable or astronaut. Also calculate the amount of mass that
inconsistent? must be converted to energy to get the astronaut
71. Construct Your Own Problem and ship to the velocity travelled. Among the
Consider a highly relativistic particle. Discuss what things to be considered are the distance to the
is meant by the term “highly relativistic.” (Note star, the velocity, and the mass of the astronaut
that, in part, it means that the particle cannot be and ship. Unless your instructor directs you
massless.) Construct a problem in which you otherwise, do not include any energy given to
calculate the wavelength of such a particle and other masses, such as rocket propellants.
show that it is very nearly the same as the 73. Critical ThinkingA space rock with a length of
wavelength of a massless particle, such as a 1,000.0 m is moving through space at exactly 0.6
photon, with the same energy. Among the things c. (a) If the space rock is moving toward an
to be considered are the rest energy of the particle observer, what is the contracted length observed?
(it should be a known particle) and its total energy, (b) If the space rock is moving away from the
which should be large compared to its rest energy. observer, what is the contracted length observed?
(c) Can the object reach the speed of light? (d) If
the object were to stop in the observer’s reference
frame, would it be observed to have proper
length?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1295
CHAPTER 29
Quantum Physics
FIGURE29.1A black fly imaged by an electron microscope is as monstrous as any science-fiction creature. (credit: U.S. Department of
Agriculture via Wikimedia Commons)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
29.1Quantization of Energy
29.2The Photoelectric Effect
29.3Photon Energies and the Electromagnetic Spectrum
29.4Photon Momentum
29.5The Particle-Wave Duality
29.6The Wave Nature of Matter
29.7Probability: The Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle
29.8The Particle-Wave Duality Reviewed
INTRODUCTION TO QUANTUM PHYSICS Quantum mechanics is the branch of physics needed to deal with
submicroscopic objects. Because these objects are smaller than we can observe directly with our senses and
generally must be observed with the aid of instruments, parts of quantum mechanics seem as foreign and bizarre as
parts of relativity. But, like relativity, quantum mechanics has been shown to be valid—truth is often stranger than
fiction.
Certain aspects of quantum mechanics are familiar to us. We accept as fact that matter is composed of atoms, the
smallest unit of an element, and that these atoms combine to form molecules, the smallest unit of a compound.
(SeeFigure 29.2.) While we cannot see the individual water molecules in a stream, for example, we are aware that
this is because molecules are so small and so numerous in that stream. When introducing atoms, we commonly say
that electrons orbit atoms in discrete shells around a tiny nucleus, itself composed of smaller particles called
protons and neutrons. We are also aware that electric charge comes in tiny units carried almost entirely by electrons
and protons. As with water molecules in a stream, we do not notice individual charges in the current through a
PAGE: 1296
1278 29 • Quantum Physics
lightbulb, because the charges are so small and so numerous in the macroscopic situations we sense directly.
FIGURE29.2Atoms and their substructure are familiar examples of objects that require quantum mechanics to be fully explained. Certain
of their characteristics, such as the discrete electron shells, are classical physics explanations. In quantum mechanics we conceptualize
discrete “electron clouds” around the nucleus.
Making Connections: Realms of Physics
Classical physics is a good approximation of modern physics under conditions first discussed in theThe Nature
of Science and Physics. Quantum mechanics is valid in general, and it must be used rather than classical physics
to describe small objects, such as atoms.
Atoms, molecules, and fundamental electron and proton charges are all examples of physical entities that are
quantized—that is, they appear only in certain discrete values and do not have every conceivable value. Quantized is
the opposite of continuous. We cannot have a fraction of an atom, or part of an electron’s charge, or 14-1/3 cents,
for example. Rather, everything is built of integral multiples of these substructures. Quantum physics is the branch
of physics that deals with small objects and the quantization of various entities, including energy and angular
momentum. Just as with classical physics, quantum physics has several subfields, such as mechanics and the study
of electromagnetic forces. Thecorrespondence principlestates that in the classical limit (large, slow-moving
objects),quantum mechanicsbecomes the same as classical physics. In this chapter, we begin the development of
quantum mechanics and its description of the strange submicroscopic world. In later chapters, we will examine
many areas, such as atomic and nuclear physics, in which quantum mechanics is crucial.
29.1 Quantization of Energy
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain Max Planck’s contribution to the development of quantum mechanics.
• Explain why atomic spectra indicate quantization.
Planck’s Contribution
Energy is quantized in some systems, meaning that the system can have only certain energies and not a continuum
of energies, unlike the classical case. This would be like having only certain speeds at which a car can travel because
its kinetic energy can have only certain values. We also find that some forms of energy transfer take place with
discrete lumps of energy. While most of us are familiar with the quantization of matter into lumps called atoms,
molecules, and the like, we are less aware that energy, too, can be quantized. Some of the earliest clues about the
necessity of quantum mechanics over classical physics came from the quantization of energy.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1297
29.1 • Quantization of Energy 1279
FIGURE29.3Graphs of blackbody radiation (from an ideal radiator) at three different radiator temperatures. The intensity or rate of
radiation emission increases dramatically with temperature, and the peak of the spectrum shifts toward the visible and ultraviolet parts of
the spectrum. The shape of the spectrum cannot be described with classical physics.
Where is the quantization of energy observed? Let us begin by considering the emission and absorption of
electromagnetic (EM) radiation. The EM spectrum radiated by a hot solid is linked directly to the solid’s temperature.
(SeeFigure 29.3.) An ideal radiator is one that has an emissivity of 1 at all wavelengths and, thus, is jet black. Ideal
radiators are therefore calledblackbodies, and their EM radiation is calledblackbody radiation. It was discussed
that the total intensity of the radiation varies as the fourth power of the absolute temperature of the body, and
that the peak of the spectrum shifts to shorter wavelengths at higher temperatures. All of this seems quite
continuous, but it was the curve of the spectrum of intensity versus wavelength that gave a clue that the energies of
the atoms in the solid are quantized. In fact, providing a theoretical explanation for the experimentally measured
shape of the spectrum was a mystery at the turn of the century. When this “ultraviolet catastrophe” was eventually
solved, the answers led to new technologies such as computers and the sophisticated imaging techniques described
in earlier chapters. Once again, physics as an enabling science changed the way we live.
The German physicist Max Planck (1858–1947) used the idea that atoms and molecules in a body act like
oscillators to absorb and emit radiation. The energies of the oscillating atoms and molecules had to be quantized to
correctly describe the shape of the blackbody spectrum. Planck deduced that the energy of an oscillator having a
frequency is given by
29.1
Here is any nonnegative integer (0, 1, 2, 3, …). The symbol stands forPlanck’s constant, given by
29.2
The equation means that an oscillator having a frequency (emitting and absorbing EM radiation of
frequency ) can have its energy increase or decrease only indiscretesteps of size
29.3
It might be helpful to mention some macroscopic analogies of this quantization of energy phenomena. This is like a
pendulum that has a characteristic oscillation frequency but can swing with only certain amplitudes. Quantization of
energy also resembles a standing wave on a string that allows only particular harmonics described by integers. It is
also similar to going up and down a hill using discrete stair steps rather than being able to move up and down a
continuous slope. Your potential energy takes on discrete values as you move from step to step.
Using the quantization of oscillators, Planck was able to correctly describe the experimentally known shape of the
blackbody spectrum. This was the first indication that energy is sometimes quantized on a small scale and earned
him the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1918. Although Planck’s theory comes from observations of a macroscopic object,
PAGE: 1298
1280 29 • Quantum Physics
its analysis is based on atoms and molecules. It was such a revolutionary departure from classical physics that
Planck himself was reluctant to accept his own idea that energy states are not continuous. The general acceptance
of Planck’s energy quantization was greatly enhanced by Einstein’s explanation of the photoelectric effect
(discussed in the next section), which took energy quantization a step further. Planck was fully involved in the
development of both early quantum mechanics and relativity. He quickly embraced Einstein’s special relativity,
published in 1905, and in 1906 Planck was the first to suggest the correct formula for relativistic momentum,
.
FIGURE29.4The German physicist Max Planck had a major influence on the early development of quantum mechanics, being the first to
recognize that energy is sometimes quantized. Planck also made important contributions to special relativity and classical physics. (credit:
Library of Congress, Prints and Photographs Division via Wikimedia Commons)
Note that Planck’s constant is a very small number. So for an infrared frequency of being emitted by a
blackbody, for example, the difference between energy levels is only
or about 0.4 eV. This 0.4 eV of energy is significant
compared with typical atomic energies, which are on the order of an electron volt, or thermal energies, which are
typically fractions of an electron volt. But on a macroscopic or classical scale, energies are typically on the order of
joules. Even if macroscopic energies are quantized, the quantum steps are too small to be noticed. This is an
example of the correspondence principle. For a large object, quantum mechanics produces results indistinguishable
from those of classical physics.
Atomic Spectra
Now let us turn our attention to theemission and absorption of EM radiation by gases. The Sun is the most common
example of a body containing gases emitting an EM spectrum that includes visible light. We also see examples in
neon signs and candle flames. Studies of emissions of hot gases began more than two centuries ago, and it was
soon recognized that these emission spectra contained huge amounts of information. The type of gas and its
temperature, for example, could be determined. We now know that these EM emissions come from electrons
transitioning between energy levels in individual atoms and molecules; thus, they are calledatomic spectra. Atomic
spectra remain an important analytical tool today.Figure 29.5shows an example of an emission spectrum obtained
by passing an electric discharge through a material. One of the most important characteristics of these spectra is
that they are discrete. By this we mean that only certain wavelengths, and hence frequencies, are emitted. This is
called a line spectrum. If frequency and energy are associated as the energies of the electrons in the
emitting atoms and molecules are quantized. This is discussed in more detail later in this chapter.
FIGURE29.5Emission spectrum of oxygen. When an electrical discharge is passed through a substance, its atoms and molecules absorb
energy, which is reemitted as EM radiation. The discrete nature of these emissions implies that the energy states of the atoms and
molecules are quantized. Such atomic spectra were used as analytical tools for many decades before it was understood why they are
quantized. (credit: Teravolt, Wikimedia Commons)
It was a major puzzle that atomic spectra are quantized. Some of the best minds of 19th-century science failed to
explain why this might be. Not until the second decade of the 20th century did an answer based on quantum
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1299
29.2 • The Photoelectric Effect 1281
mechanics begin to emerge. Again a macroscopic or classical body of gas was involved in the studies, but the effect,
as we shall see, is due to individual atoms and molecules.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Models of the Hydrogen Atom
How did scientists figure out the structure of atoms without looking at them? Try out different models by shooting
light at the atom. Check how the prediction of the model matches the experimental results.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/l/28atom_model).
29.2 The Photoelectric Effect
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe a typical photoelectric-effect experiment.
• Determine the maximum kinetic energy of photoelectrons ejected by photons of one energy or
wavelength, when given the maximum kinetic energy of photoelectrons for a different photon energy or
wavelength.
When light strikes materials, it can eject electrons from them. This is called thephotoelectric effect, meaning that
light (photo) produces electricity. One common use of the photoelectric effect is in light meters, such as those that
adjust the automatic iris on various types of cameras. In a similar way, another use is in solar cells, as you probably
have in your calculator or have seen on a roof top or a roadside sign. These make use of the photoelectric effect to
convert light into electricity for running different devices.
FIGURE29.6The photoelectric effect can be observed by allowing light to fall on the metal plate in this evacuated tube. Electrons ejected
by the light are collected on the collector wire and measured as a current. A retarding voltage between the collector wire and plate can then
be adjusted so as to determine the energy of the ejected electrons. For example, if it is sufficiently negative, no electrons will reach the
wire. (credit: P.P. Urone)
This effect has been known for more than a century and can be studied using a device such as that shown inFigure
29.6. This figure shows an evacuated tube with a metal plate and a collector wire that are connected by a variable
voltage source, with the collector more negative than the plate. When light (or other EM radiation) strikes the plate
in the evacuated tube, it may eject electrons. If the electrons have energy in electron volts (eV) greater than the
potential difference between the plate and the wire in volts, some electrons will be collected on the wire. Since the
electron energy in eV is , where is the electron charge and is the potential difference, the electron energy can
be measured by adjusting the retarding voltage between the wire and the plate. The voltage that stops the electrons
from reaching the wire equals the energy in eV. For example, if barely stops the electrons, their energy is
3.00 eV. The number of electrons ejected can be determined by measuring the current between the wire and plate.
The more light, the more electrons; a little circuitry allows this device to be used as a light meter.
What is really important about the photoelectric effect is what Albert Einstein deduced from it. Einstein realized that
there were several characteristics of the photoelectric effect that could be explained only ifEM radiation is itself
quantized: the apparently continuous stream of energy in an EM wave is actually composed of energy quanta called
photons. In his explanation of the photoelectric effect, Einstein defined a quantized unit or quantum of EM energy,
which we now call aphoton, with an energy proportional to the frequency of EM radiation. In equation form, the
PAGE: 1300
1282 29 • Quantum Physics
photon energyis
29.4
where is the energy of a photon of frequency and is Planck’s constant. This revolutionary idea looks similar to
Planck’s quantization of energy states in blackbody oscillators, but it is quite different. It is the quantization of EM
radiation itself. EM waves are composed of photons and are not continuous smooth waves as described in previous
chapters on optics. Their energy is absorbed and emitted in lumps, not continuously. This is exactly consistent with
Planck’s quantization of energy levels in blackbody oscillators, since these oscillators increase and decrease their
energy in steps of by absorbing and emitting photons having . We do not observe this with our eyes,
because there are so many photons in common light sources that individual photons go unnoticed. (SeeFigure
29.7.) The next section of the text (Photon Energies and the Electromagnetic Spectrum) is devoted to a discussion of
photons and some of their characteristics and implications. For now, we will use the photon concept to explain the
photoelectric effect, much as Einstein did.
FIGURE29.7An EM wave of frequency is composed of photons, or individual quanta of EM radiation. The energy of each photon is
, where is Planck’s constant and is the frequency of the EM radiation. Higher intensity means more photons per unit area. The
flashlight emits large numbers of photons of many different frequencies, hence others have energy , and so on.
The photoelectric effect has the properties discussed below. All these properties are consistent with the idea that
individual photons of EM radiation are absorbed by individual electrons in a material, with the electron gaining the
photon’s energy. Some of these properties are inconsistent with the idea that EM radiation is a simple wave. For
simplicity, let us consider what happens with monochromatic EM radiation in which all photons have the same
energy .
1. If we vary the frequency of the EM radiation falling on a material, we find the following: For a given material,
there is a threshold frequency for the EM radiation below which no electrons are ejected, regardless of
intensity. Individual photons interact with individual electrons. Thus if the photon energy is too small to break
an electron away, no electrons will be ejected. If EM radiation was a simple wave, sufficient energy could be
obtained by increasing the intensity.
2. Once EM radiation falls on a material, electrons are ejected without delay. As soon as an individual photon of a
sufficiently high frequency is absorbed by an individual electron, the electron is ejected. If the EM radiation
were a simple wave, several minutes would be required for sufficient energy to be deposited to the metal
surface to eject an electron.
3. The number of electrons ejected per unit time is proportional to the intensity of the EM radiation and to no other
characteristic. High-intensity EM radiation consists of large numbers of photons per unit area, with all photons
having the same characteristic energy .
4. If we vary the intensity of the EM radiation and measure the energy of ejected electrons, we find the following:
The maximum kinetic energy of ejected electrons is independent of the intensity of the EM radiation. Since
there are so many electrons in a material, it is extremely unlikely that two photons will interact with the same
electron at the same time, thereby increasing the energy given it. Instead (as noted in 3 above), increased
intensity results in more electrons of the same energy being ejected. If EM radiation were a simple wave, a
higher intensity could give more energy, and higher-energy electrons would be ejected.
5. The kinetic energy of an ejected electron equals the photon energy minus the binding energy of the electron in
the specific material. An individual photon can give all of its energy to an electron. The photon’s energy is partly
used to break the electron away from the material. The remainder goes into the ejected electron’s kinetic
energy. In equation form, this is given by
29.5
where is the maximum kinetic energy of the ejected electron, is the photon’s energy, and BE is the
binding energyof the electron to the particular material. (BE is sometimes called thework functionof the
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1301
29.2 • The Photoelectric Effect 1283
material.) This equation, due to Einstein in 1905, explains the properties of the photoelectric effect
quantitatively. An individual photon of EM radiation (it does not come any other way) interacts with an individual
electron, supplying enough energy, BE, to break it away, with the remainder going to kinetic energy. The binding
energy is , where is the threshold frequency for the particular material.Figure 29.8shows a graph
of maximum versus the frequency of incident EM radiation falling on a particular material.
FIGURE29.8Photoelectric effect. A graph of the kinetic energy of an ejected electron, , versus the frequency of EM radiation impinging
on a certain material. There is a threshold frequency below which no electrons are ejected, because the individual photon interacting with
an individual electron has insufficient energy to break it away. Above the threshold energy, increases linearly with , consistent with
. The slope of this line is —the data can be used to determine Planck’s constant experimentally. Einstein gave the first
successful explanation of such data by proposing the idea of photons—quanta of EM radiation.
Einstein’s idea that EM radiation is quantized was crucial to the beginnings of quantum mechanics. It is a far more
general concept than its explanation of the photoelectric effect might imply. All EM radiation can also be modeled in
the form of photons, and the characteristics of EM radiation are entirely consistent with this fact. (As we will see in
the next section, many aspects of EM radiation, such as the hazards of ultraviolet (UV) radiation, can be explained
onlyby photon properties.) More famous for modern relativity, Einstein planted an important seed for quantum
mechanics in 1905, the same year he published his first paper on special relativity. His explanation of the
photoelectric effect was the basis for the Nobel Prize awarded to him in 1921. Although his other contributions to
theoretical physics were also noted in that award, special and general relativity were not fully recognized in spite of
having been partially verified by experiment by 1921. Although hero-worshipped, this great man never received
Nobel recognition for his most famous work—relativity.
EXAMPLE 29.1
Calculating Photon Energy and the Photoelectric Effect: A Violet Light
(a) What is the energy in joules and electron volts of a photon of 420-nm violet light? (b) What is the maximum
kinetic energy of electrons ejected from calcium by 420-nm violet light, given that the binding energy (or work
function) of electrons for calcium metal is 2.71 eV?
Strategy
To solve part (a), note that the energy of a photon is given by . For part (b), once the energy of the photon is
calculated, it is a straightforward application of to find the ejected electron’s maximum kinetic
energy, since BE is given.
Solution for (a)
Photon energy is given by
29.6
Since we are given the wavelength rather than the frequency, we solve the familiar relationship for the
frequency, yielding
PAGE: 1302
1284 29 • Quantum Physics
29.7
Combining these two equations gives the useful relationship
29.8
Now substituting known values yields
29.9
Converting to eV, the energy of the photon is
29.10
Solution for (b)
Finding the kinetic energy of the ejected electron is now a simple application of the equation .
Substituting the photon energy and binding energy yields
29.11
Discussion
The energy of this 420-nm photon of violet light is a tiny fraction of a joule, and so it is no wonder that a single
photon would be difficult for us to sense directly—humans are more attuned to energies on the order of joules. But
looking at the energy in electron volts, we can see that this photon has enough energy to affect atoms and
molecules. A DNA molecule can be broken with about 1 eV of energy, for example, and typical atomic and molecular
energies are on the order of eV, so that the UV photon in this example could have biological effects. The ejected
electron (called aphotoelectron) has a rather low energy, and it would not travel far, except in a vacuum. The
electron would be stopped by a retarding potential of but 0.26 eV. In fact, if the photon wavelength were longer and
its energy less than 2.71 eV, then the formula would give a negative kinetic energy, an impossibility. This simply
means that the 420-nm photons with their 2.96-eV energy are not much above the frequency threshold. You can
show for yourself that the threshold wavelength is 459 nm (blue light). This means that if calcium metal is used in a
light meter, the meter will be insensitive to wavelengths longer than those of blue light. Such a light meter would be
completely insensitive to red light, for example.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Photoelectric Effect
See how light knocks electrons off a metal target, and recreate the experiment that spawned the field of quantum
mechanics.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/l/28photoelectric).
29.3 Photon Energies and the Electromagnetic Spectrum
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the relationship between the energy of a photon in joules or electron volts and its wavelength or
frequency.
• Calculate the number of photons per second emitted by a monochromatic source of specific wavelength
and power.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1303
29.3 • Photon Energies and the Electromagnetic Spectrum 1285
Ionizing Radiation
A photon is a quantum of EM radiation. Its energy is given by and is related to the frequency and
wavelength of the radiation by
29.12
where is the energy of a single photon and is the speed of light. When working with small systems, energy in eV
is often useful. Note that Planck’s constant in these units is
29.13
Since many wavelengths are stated in nanometers (nm), it is also useful to know that
29.14
These will make many calculations a little easier.
All EM radiation is composed of photons.Figure 29.9shows various divisions of the EM spectrum plotted against
wavelength, frequency, and photon energy. Previously in this book, photon characteristics were alluded to in the
discussion of some of the characteristics of UV, x rays, and rays, the first of which start with frequencies just above
violet in the visible spectrum. It was noted that these types of EM radiation have characteristics much different than
visible light. We can now see that such properties arise because photon energy is larger at high frequencies.
FIGURE29.9The EM spectrum, showing major categories as a function of photon energy in eV, as well as wavelength and frequency.
Certain characteristics of EM radiation are directly attributable to photon energy alone.
Rotational energies of molecules eV
Vibrational energies of molecules 0.1 eV
Energy between outer electron shells in atoms 1 eV
Binding energy of a weakly bound molecule 1 eV
Energy of red light 2 eV
Binding energy of a tightly bound molecule 10 eV
Energy to ionize atom or molecule 10 to 1000 eV
TABLE29.1Representative Energies for Submicroscopic Effects
(Order of Magnitude Only)
PAGE: 1304
1286 29 • Quantum Physics
Photons act as individual quanta and interact with individual electrons, atoms, molecules, and so on. The energy a
photon carries is, thus, crucial to the effects it has.Table 29.1lists representative submicroscopic energies in eV.
When we compare photon energies from the EM spectrum inFigure 29.9with energies in the table, we can see how
effects vary with the type of EM radiation.
Gamma rays, a form of nuclear and cosmic EM radiation, can have the highest frequencies and, hence, the highest
photon energies in the EM spectrum. For example, a -ray photon with has an energy
This is sufficient energy to ionize thousands of atoms and molecules, since
only 10 to 1000 eV are needed per ionization. In fact, rays are one type ofionizing radiation, as are x rays and UV,
because they produce ionization in materials that absorb them. Because so much ionization can be produced, a
single -ray photon can cause significant damage to biological tissue, killing cells or damaging their ability to
properly reproduce. When cell reproduction is disrupted, the result can be cancer, one of the known effects of
exposure to ionizing radiation. Since cancer cells are rapidly reproducing, they are exceptionally sensitive to the
disruption produced by ionizing radiation. This means that ionizing radiation has positive uses in cancer treatment
as well as risks in producing cancer.
FIGURE29.10One of the first x-ray images, taken by Röentgen himself. The hand belongs to Bertha Röentgen, his wife. (credit: Wilhelm
Conrad Röntgen, via Wikimedia Commons)
High photon energy also enables rays to penetrate materials, since a collision with a single atom or molecule is
unlikely to absorb all the ray’s energy. This can make rays useful as a probe, and they are sometimes used in
medical imaging.x rays, as you can see inFigure 29.9, overlap with the low-frequency end of the ray range. Since
x rays have energies of keV and up, individual x-ray photons also can produce large amounts of ionization. At lower
photon energies, x rays are not as penetrating as rays and are slightly less hazardous. X rays are ideal for medical
imaging, their most common use, and a fact that was recognized immediately upon their discovery in 1895 by the
German physicist W. C. Roentgen (1845–1923). (SeeFigure 29.10.) Within one year of their discovery, x rays (for a
time called Roentgen rays) were used for medical diagnostics. Roentgen received the 1901 Nobel Prize for the
discovery of x rays.
Connections: Conservation of Energy
Once again, we find that conservation of energy allows us to consider the initial and final forms that energy
takes, without having to make detailed calculations of the intermediate steps.Example 29.2is solved by
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1305
29.3 • Photon Energies and the Electromagnetic Spectrum 1287
considering only the initial and final forms of energy.
FIGURE29.11X rays are produced when energetic electrons strike the copper anode of this cathode ray tube (CRT). Electrons (shown here
as separate particles) interact individually with the material they strike, sometimes producing photons of EM radiation.
While rays originate in nuclear decay, x rays are produced by the process shown inFigure 29.11. Electrons ejected
by thermal agitation from a hot filament in a vacuum tube are accelerated through a high voltage, gaining kinetic
energy from the electrical potential energy. When they strike the anode, the electrons convert their kinetic energy to
a variety of forms, including thermal energy. But since an accelerated charge radiates EM waves, and since the
electrons act individually, photons are also produced. Some of these x-ray photons obtain the kinetic energy of the
electron. The accelerated electrons originate at the cathode, so such a tube is called a cathode ray tube (CRT), and
various versions of them are found in older TV and computer screens as well as in x-ray machines.
EXAMPLE 29.2
X-ray Photon Energy and X-ray Tube Voltage
Find the maximum energy in eV of an x-ray photon produced by electrons accelerated through a potential difference
of 50.0 kV in a CRT like the one inFigure 29.11.
Strategy
Electrons can give all of their kinetic energy to a single photon when they strike the anode of a CRT. (This is
something like the photoelectric effect in reverse.) The kinetic energy of the electron comes from electrical potential
energy. Thus we can simply equate the maximum photon energy to the electrical potential energy—that is,
(We do not have to calculate each step from beginning to end if we know that all of the starting energy is
converted to the final form )
Solution
The maximum photon energy is , where is the charge of the electron and is the accelerating voltage.
Thus,
29.15
From the definition of the electron volt, we know , where Gathering factors
and converting energy to eV yields
PAGE: 1306
1288 29 • Quantum Physics
29.16
Discussion
This example produces a result that can be applied to many similar situations. If you accelerate a single elementary
charge, like that of an electron, through a potential given in volts, then its energy in eV has the same numerical value.
Thus a 50.0-kV potential generates 50.0 keV electrons, which in turn can produce photons with a maximum energy
of 50 keV. Similarly, a 100-kV potential in an x-ray tube can generate up to 100-keV x-ray photons. Many x-ray tubes
have adjustable voltages so that various energy x rays with differing energies, and therefore differing abilities to
penetrate, can be generated.
FIGURE29.12X-ray spectrum obtained when energetic electrons strike a material. The smooth part of the spectrum is bremsstrahlung,
while the peaks are characteristic of the anode material. Both are atomic processes that produce energetic photons known as x-ray
photons.
Figure 29.12shows the spectrum of x rays obtained from an x-ray tube. There are two distinct features to the
spectrum. First, the smooth distribution results from electrons being decelerated in the anode material. A curve like
this is obtained by detecting many photons, and it is apparent that the maximum energy is unlikely. This
decelerating process produces radiation that is calledbremsstrahlung(German forbraking radiation). The second
feature is the existence of sharp peaks in the spectrum; these are calledcharacteristic x rays, since they are
characteristic of the anode material. Characteristic x rays come from atomic excitations unique to a given type of
anode material. They are akin to lines in atomic spectra, implying the energy levels of atoms are quantized.
Phenomena such as discrete atomic spectra and characteristic x rays are explored further inAtomic Physics.
Ultraviolet radiation(approximately 4 eV to 300 eV) overlaps with the low end of the energy range of x rays, but UV
is typically lower in energy. UV comes from the de-excitation of atoms that may be part of a hot solid or gas. These
atoms can be given energy that they later release as UV by numerous processes, including electric discharge,
nuclear explosion, thermal agitation, and exposure to x rays. A UV photon has sufficient energy to ionize atoms and
molecules, which makes its effects different from those of visible light. UV thus has some of the same biological
effects as rays and x rays. For example, it can cause skin cancer and is used as a sterilizer. The major difference is
that several UV photons are required to disrupt cell reproduction or kill a bacterium, whereas single -ray and X-ray
photons can do the same damage. But since UV does have the energy to alter molecules, it can do what visible light
cannot. One of the beneficial aspects of UV is that it triggers the production of vitamin D in the skin, whereas visible
light has insufficient energy per photon to alter the molecules that trigger this production. Infantile jaundice is
treated by exposing the baby to UV (with eye protection), called phototherapy, the beneficial effects of which are
thought to be related to its ability to help prevent the buildup of potentially toxic bilirubin in the blood.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1307
29.3 • Photon Energies and the Electromagnetic Spectrum 1289
EXAMPLE 29.3
Photon Energy and Effects for UV
Short-wavelength UV is sometimes called vacuum UV, because it is strongly absorbed by air and must be studied in
a vacuum. Calculate the photon energy in eV for 100-nm vacuum UV, and estimate the number of molecules it could
ionize or break apart.
Strategy
Using the equation and appropriate constants, we can find the photon energy and compare it with energy
information inTable 29.1.
Solution
The energy of a photon is given by
29.17
Using we find that
29.18
Discussion
According toTable 29.1, this photon energy might be able to ionize an atom or molecule, and it is about what is
needed to break up a tightly bound molecule, since they are bound by approximately 10 eV. This photon energy
could destroy about a dozen weakly bound molecules. Because of its high photon energy, UV disrupts atoms and
molecules it interacts with. One good consequence is that all but the longest-wavelength UV is strongly absorbed
and is easily blocked by sunglasses. In fact, most of the Sun’s UV is absorbed by a thin layer of ozone in the upper
atmosphere, protecting sensitive organisms on Earth. Damage to our ozone layer by the addition of such chemicals
as CFC’s has reduced this protection for us.
Visible Light
The range of photon energies forvisible lightfrom red to violet is 1.63 to 3.26 eV, respectively (left for this
chapter’s Problems and Exercises to verify). These energies are on the order of those between outer electron shells
in atoms and molecules. This means that these photons can be absorbed by atoms and molecules. Asinglephoton
can actually stimulate the retina, for example, by altering a receptor molecule that then triggers a nerve impulse.
Photons can be absorbed or emitted only by atoms and molecules that have precisely the correct quantized energy
step to do so. For example, if a red photon of frequency encounters a molecule that has an energy step, equal
to then the photon can be absorbed. Violet flowers absorb red and reflect violet; this implies there is no energy
step between levels in the receptor molecule equal to the violet photon’s energy, but there is an energy step for the
red.
There are some noticeable differences in the characteristics of light between the two ends of the visible spectrum
that are due to photon energies. Red light has insufficient photon energy to expose most black-and-white film, and it
is thus used to illuminate darkrooms where such film is developed. Since violet light has a higher photon energy,
dyes that absorb violet tend to fade more quickly than those that do not. (SeeFigure 29.13.) Take a look at some
faded color posters in a storefront some time, and you will notice that the blues and violets are the last to fade. This
is because other dyes, such as red and green dyes, absorb blue and violet photons, the higher energies of which
break up their weakly bound molecules. (Complex molecules such as those in dyes and DNA tend to be weakly
bound.) Blue and violet dyes reflect those colors and, therefore, do not absorb these more energetic photons, thus
suffering less molecular damage.
PAGE: 1308
1290 29 • Quantum Physics
FIGURE29.13Why do the reds, yellows, and greens fade before the blues and violets when exposed to the Sun, as with this poster? The
answer is related to photon energy. (credit: Deb Collins, Flickr)
Transparent materials, such as some glasses, do not absorb any visible light, because there is no energy step in the
atoms or molecules that could absorb the light. Since individual photons interact with individual atoms, it is nearly
impossible to have two photons absorbed simultaneously to reach a large energy step. Because of its lower photon
energy, visible light can sometimes pass through many kilometers of a substance, while higher frequencies like UV, x
ray, and rays are absorbed, because they have sufficient photon energy to ionize the material.
EXAMPLE 29.4
How Many Photons per Second Does a Typical Light Bulb Produce?
Assuming that 10.0% of a 100-W light bulb’s energy output is in the visible range (typical for incandescent bulbs)
with an average wavelength of 580 nm, calculate the number of visible photons emitted per second.
Strategy
Power is energy per unit time, and so if we can find the energy per photon, we can determine the number of photons
per second. This will best be done in joules, since power is given in watts, which are joules per second.
Solution
The power in visible light production is 10.0% of 100 W, or 10.0 J/s. The energy of the average visible photon is
found by substituting the given average wavelength into the formula
29.19
This produces
29.20
The number of visible photons per second is thus
29.21
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1309
29.3 • Photon Energies and the Electromagnetic Spectrum 1291
Discussion
This incredible number of photons per second is verification that individual photons are insignificant in ordinary
human experience. It is also a verification of the correspondence principle—on the macroscopic scale, quantization
becomes essentially continuous or classical. Finally, there are so many photons emitted by a 100-W lightbulb that it
can be seen by the unaided eye many kilometers away.
Lower-Energy Photons
Infrared radiation (IR)has even lower photon energies than visible light and cannot significantly alter atoms and
molecules. IR can be absorbed and emitted by atoms and molecules, particularly between closely spaced states. IR
is extremely strongly absorbed by water, for example, because water molecules have many states separated by
energies on the order of to well within the IR and microwave energy ranges. This is why in the IR
range, skin is almost jet black, with an emissivity near 1—there are many states in water molecules in the skin that
can absorb a large range of IR photon energies. Not all molecules have this property. Air, for example, is nearly
transparent to many IR frequencies.
Microwavesare the highest frequencies that can be produced by electronic circuits, although they are also
produced naturally. Thus microwaves are similar to IR but do not extend to as high frequencies. There are states in
water and other molecules that have the same frequency and energy as microwaves, typically about This
is one reason why food absorbs microwaves more strongly than many other materials, making microwave ovens an
efficient way of putting energy directly into food.
Photon energies for both IR and microwaves are so low that huge numbers of photons are involved in any significant
energy transfer by IR or microwaves (such as warming yourself with a heat lamp or cooking pizza in the microwave).
Visible light, IR, microwaves, and all lower frequencies cannot produce ionization with single photons and do not
ordinarily have the hazards of higher frequencies. When visible, IR, or microwave radiationishazardous, such as the
inducement of cataracts by microwaves, the hazard is due to huge numbers of photons acting together (not to an
accumulation of photons, such as sterilization by weak UV). The negative effects of visible, IR, or microwave
radiation can be thermal effects, which could be produced by any heat source. But one difference is that at very high
intensity, strong electric and magnetic fields can be produced by photons acting together. Such electromagnetic
fields (EMF) can actually ionize materials.
Misconception Alert: High-Voltage Power Lines
Although some people think that living near high-voltage power lines is hazardous to one’s health, ongoing
studies of the transient field effects produced by these lines show their strengths to be insufficient to cause
damage. Demographic studies also fail to show significant correlation of ill effects with high-voltage power lines.
The American Physical Society issued a report over 20 years ago on power-line fields, and additional studies
since that time show no consistent, significant link between cancer and power-line fields.
It is virtually impossible to detect individual photons having frequencies below microwave frequencies, because of
their low photon energy. But the photons are there. A continuous EM wave can be modeled as photons. At low
frequencies, EM waves are generally treated as time- and position-varying electric and magnetic fields with no
discernible quantization. This is another example of the correspondence principle in situations involving huge
numbers of photons.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Color Vision
Make a whole rainbow by mixing red, green, and blue light. Change the wavelength of a monochromatic beam or
filter white light. View the light as a solid beam, or see the individual photons.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/29-3-photon-energies-and-the-
PAGE: 1310
1292 29 • Quantum Physics
electromagnetic-spectrum)
29.4 Photon Momentum
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Relate the linear momentum of a photon to its energy or wavelength, and apply linear momentum
conservation to simple processes involving the emission, absorption, or reflection of photons.
• Account qualitatively for the increase of photon wavelength that is observed, and explain the significance
of the Compton wavelength.
Measuring Photon Momentum
The quantum of EM radiation we call aphotonhas properties analogous to those of particles we can see, such as
grains of sand. A photon interacts as a unit in collisions or when absorbed, rather than as an extensive wave.
Massive quanta, like electrons, also act like macroscopic particles—something we expect, because they are the
smallest units of matter. Particles carry momentum as well as energy. Despite photons having no mass, there has
long been evidence that EM radiation carries momentum. (Maxwell and others who studied EM waves predicted that
they would carry momentum.) It is now a well-established fact that photonsdohave momentum. In fact, photon
momentum is suggested by the photoelectric effect, where photons knock electrons out of a substance.Figure
29.14shows macroscopic evidence of photon momentum.
FIGURE29.14The tails of the Hale-Bopp comet point away from the Sun, evidence that light has momentum. Dust emanating from the
body of the comet forms this tail. Particles of dust are pushed away from the Sun by light reflecting from them. The blue ionized gas tail is
also produced by photons interacting with atoms in the comet material. (credit: Geoff Chester, U.S. Navy, via Wikimedia Commons)
Figure 29.14shows a comet with two prominent tails. What most people do not know about the tails is that they
always pointawayfrom the Sun rather than trailing behind the comet (like the tail of Bo Peep’s sheep). Comet tails
are composed of gases and dust evaporated from the body of the comet and ionized gas. The dust particles recoil
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1311
29.4 • Photon Momentum 1293
away from the Sun when photons scatter from them. Evidently, photons carry momentum in the direction of their
motion (away from the Sun), and some of this momentum is transferred to dust particles in collisions. Gas atoms
and molecules in the blue tail are most affected by other particles of radiation, such as protons and electrons
emanating from the Sun, rather than by the momentum of photons.
Connections: Conservation of Momentum
Not only is momentum conserved in all realms of physics, but all types of particles are found to have
momentum. We expect particles with mass to have momentum, but now we see that massless particles
including photons also carry momentum.
Momentum is conserved in quantum mechanics just as it is in relativity and classical physics. Some of the earliest
direct experimental evidence of this came from scattering of x-ray photons by electrons in substances, named
Compton scattering after the American physicist Arthur H. Compton (1892–1962). Around 1923, Compton observed
that x rays scattered from materials had a decreased energy and correctly analyzed this as being due to the
scattering of photons from electrons. This phenomenon could be handled as a collision between two particles—a
photon and an electron at rest in the material. Energy and momentum are conserved in the collision. (SeeFigure
29.15) He won a Nobel Prize in 1929 for the discovery of this scattering, now called theCompton effect, because it
helped prove thatphoton momentumis given by
29.22
where is Planck’s constant and is the photon wavelength. (Note that relativistic momentum given as is
valid only for particles having mass.)
FIGURE29.15The Compton effect is the name given to the scattering of a photon by an electron. Energy and momentum are conserved,
resulting in a reduction of both for the scattered photon. Studying this effect, Compton verified that photons have momentum.
We can see that photon momentum is small, since and is very small. It is for this reason that we do not
ordinarily observe photon momentum. Our mirrors do not recoil when light reflects from them (except perhaps in
cartoons). Compton saw the effects of photon momentum because he was observing x rays, which have a small
wavelength and a relatively large momentum, interacting with the lightest of particles, the electron.
EXAMPLE 29.5
Electron and Photon Momentum Compared
(a) Calculate the momentum of a visible photon that has a wavelength of 500 nm. (b) Find the velocity of an electron
having the same momentum. (c) What is the energy of the electron, and how does it compare with the energy of the
photon?
PAGE: 1312
1294 29 • Quantum Physics
Strategy
Finding the photon momentum is a straightforward application of its definition: . If we find the photon
momentum is small, then we can assume that an electron with the same momentum will be nonrelativistic, making
it easy to find its velocity and kinetic energy from the classical formulas.
Solution for (a)
Photon momentum is given by the equation:
29.23
Entering the given photon wavelength yields
29.24
Solution for (b)
Since this momentum is indeed small, we will use the classical expression to find the velocity of an electron
with this momentum. Solving for and using the known value for the mass of an electron gives
29.25
Solution for (c)
The electron has kinetic energy, which is classically given by
29.26
Thus,
29.27
Converting this to eV by multiplying by yields
29.28
The photon energy is
29.29
which is about five orders of magnitude greater.
Discussion
Photon momentum is indeed small. Even if we have huge numbers of them, the total momentum they carry is small.
An electron with the same momentum has a 1460 m/s velocity, which is clearly nonrelativistic. A more massive
particle with the same momentum would have an even smaller velocity. This is borne out by the fact that it takes far
less energy to give an electron the same momentum as a photon. But on a quantum-mechanical scale, especially for
high-energy photons interacting with small masses, photon momentum is significant. Even on a large scale, photon
momentum can have an effect if there are enough of them and if there is nothing to prevent the slow recoil of
matter. Comet tails are one example, but there are also proposals to build space sails that use huge low-mass
mirrors (made of aluminized Mylar) to reflect sunlight. In the vacuum of space, the mirrors would gradually recoil
and could actually take spacecraft from place to place in the solar system. (SeeFigure 29.16.)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1313
29.4 • Photon Momentum 1295
FIGURE29.16(a) Space sails have been proposed that use the momentum of sunlight reflecting from gigantic low-mass sails to propel
spacecraft about the solar system. A Russian test model of this (the Cosmos 1) was launched in 2005, but did not make it into orbit due to a
rocket failure. (b) A U.S. version of this, labeled LightSail-1, is scheduled for trial launches in the first part of this decade. It will have a
40-m2sail. (credit: Kim Newton/NASA)
Relativistic Photon Momentum
There is a relationship between photon momentum and photon energy that is consistent with the relation given
previously for the relativistic total energy of a particle as . We know is zero for a photon, but is
not, so that becomes
29.30
or
29.31
To check the validity of this relation, note that for a photon. Substituting this into yields
29.32
as determined experimentally and discussed above. Thus, is equivalent to Compton’s result . For a
further verification of the relationship between photon energy and momentum, seeExample 29.6.
Photon Detectors
Almost all detection systems talked about thus far—eyes, photographic plates, photomultiplier tubes in
microscopes, and CCD cameras—rely on particle-like properties of photons interacting with a sensitive area. A
change is caused and either the change is cascaded or zillions of points are recorded to form an image we
detect. These detectors are used in biomedical imaging systems, and there is ongoing research into improving
the efficiency of receiving photons, particularly by cooling detection systems and reducing thermal effects.
EXAMPLE 29.6
Photon Energy and Momentum
Show that for the photon considered in theExample 29.5.
Strategy
We will take the energy found inExample 29.5, divide it by the speed of light, and see if the same momentum is
obtained as before.
Solution
Given that the energy of the photon is 2.48 eV and converting this to joules, we get
PAGE: 1314
1296 29 • Quantum Physics
29.33
Discussion
This value for momentum is the same as found before (note that unrounded values are used in all calculations to
avoid even small rounding errors), an expected verification of the relationship . This also means the
relationship between energy, momentum, and mass given by applies to both matter and
photons. Once again, note that is not zero, even when is.
Problem-Solving Suggestion
Note that the forms of the constants and may be particularly useful
for this section’s Problems and Exercises.
29.5 The Particle-Wave Duality
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain what the term particle-wave duality means, and why it is applied to EM radiation.
We have long known that EM radiation is a wave, capable of interference and diffraction. We now see that light can
be modeled as photons, which are massless particles. This may seem contradictory, since we ordinarily deal with
large objects that never act like both wave and particle. An ocean wave, for example, looks nothing like a rock. To
understand small-scale phenomena, we make analogies with the large-scale phenomena we observe directly. When
we say something behaves like a wave, we mean it shows interference effects analogous to those seen in
overlapping water waves. (SeeFigure 29.17.) Two examples of waves are sound and EM radiation. When we say
something behaves like a particle, we mean that it interacts as a discrete unit with no interference effects. Examples
of particles include electrons, atoms, and photons of EM radiation. How do we talk about a phenomenon that acts
like both a particle and a wave?
FIGURE29.17(a) The interference pattern for light through a double slit is a wave property understood by analogy to water waves. (b) The
properties of photons having quantized energy and momentum and acting as a concentrated unit are understood by analogy to
macroscopic particles.
There is no doubt that EM radiation interferes and has the properties of wavelength and frequency. There is also no
doubt that it behaves as particlesâ€”photons with discrete energy. We call this twofold nature theparticle-wave
duality, meaning that EM radiation has both particle and wave properties. This so-called duality is simply a term for
properties of the photon analogous to phenomena we can observe directly, on a macroscopic scale. If this term
seems strange, it is because we do not ordinarily observe details on the quantum level directly, and our observations
yield either particleorwavelike properties, but never both simultaneously.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1315
29.6 • The Wave Nature of Matter 1297
Since we have a particle-wave duality for photons, and since we have seen connections between photons and
matter in that both have momentum, it is reasonable to ask whether there is a particle-wave duality for matter as
well. If the EM radiation we once thought to be a pure wave has particle properties, is it possible that matter has
wave properties? The answer is yes. The consequences are tremendous, as we will begin to see in the next section.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Quantum Wave Interference
When do photons, electrons, and atoms behave like particles and when do they behave like waves? Watch waves
spread out and interfere as they pass through a double slit, then get detected on a screen as tiny dots. Use quantum
detectors to explore how measurements change the waves and the patterns they produce on the screen.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/l/21intquawavint).
29.6 The Wave Nature of Matter
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the Davisson-Germer experiment, and explain how it provides evidence for the wave nature of
electrons.
De Broglie Wavelength
In 1923 a French physics graduate student named Prince Louis-Victor de Broglie (1892–1987) made a radical
proposal based on the hope that nature is symmetric. If EM radiation has both particle and wave properties, then
nature would be symmetric if matter also had both particle and wave properties. If what we once thought of as an
unequivocal wave (EM radiation) is also a particle, then what we think of as an unequivocal particle (matter) may
also be a wave. De Broglie’s suggestion, made as part of his doctoral thesis, was so radical that it was greeted with
some skepticism. A copy of his thesis was sent to Einstein, who said it was not only probably correct, but that it
might be of fundamental importance. With the support of Einstein and a few other prominent physicists, de Broglie
was awarded his doctorate.
De Broglie took both relativity and quantum mechanics into account to develop the proposal thatall particles have a
wavelength, given by
29.34
where is Planck’s constant and is momentum. This is defined to be thede Broglie wavelength. (Note that we
already have this for photons, from the equation .) The hallmark of a wave is interference. If matter is a
wave, then it must exhibit constructive and destructive interference. Why isn’t this ordinarily observed? The answer
is that in order to see significant interference effects, a wave must interact with an object about the same size as its
wavelength. Since is very small, is also small, especially for macroscopic objects. A 3-kg bowling ball moving at
10 m/s, for example, has
29.35
This means that to see its wave characteristics, the bowling ball would have to interact with something about
in size—far smaller than anything known. When waves interact with objects much larger than their
wavelength, they show negligible interference effects and move in straight lines (such as light rays in geometric
optics). To get easily observed interference effects from particles of matter, the longest wavelength and hence
smallest mass possible would be useful. Therefore, this effect was first observed with electrons.
American physicists Clinton J. Davisson and Lester H. Germer in 1925 and, independently, British physicist G. P.
Thomson (son of J. J. Thomson, discoverer of the electron) in 1926 scattered electrons from crystals and found
diffraction patterns. These patterns are exactly consistent with interference of electrons having the de Broglie
PAGE: 1316
1298 29 • Quantum Physics
wavelength and are somewhat analogous to light interacting with a diffraction grating. (SeeFigure 29.18.)
Connections: Waves
All microscopic particles, whether massless, like photons, or having mass, like electrons, have wave properties.
The relationship between momentum and wavelength is fundamental for all particles.
De Broglie’s proposal of a wave nature for all particles initiated a remarkably productive era in which the foundations
for quantum mechanics were laid. In 1926, the Austrian physicist Erwin Schrödinger (1887–1961) published four
papers in which the wave nature of particles was treated explicitly with wave equations. At the same time, many
others began important work. Among them was German physicist Werner Heisenberg (1901–1976) who, among
many other contributions to quantum mechanics, formulated a mathematical treatment of the wave nature of
matter that used matrices rather than wave equations. We will deal with some specifics in later sections, but it is
worth noting that de Broglie’s work was a watershed for the development of quantum mechanics. De Broglie was
awarded the Nobel Prize in 1929 for his vision, as were Davisson and G. P. Thomson in 1937 for their experimental
verification of de Broglie’s hypothesis.
FIGURE29.18This diffraction pattern was obtained for electrons diffracted by crystalline silicon. Bright regions are those of constructive
interference, while dark regions are those of destructive interference. (credit: Ndthe, Wikimedia Commons)
EXAMPLE 29.7
Electron Wavelength versus Velocity and Energy
For an electron having a de Broglie wavelength of 0.167 nm (appropriate for interacting with crystal lattice
structures that are about this size): (a) Calculate the electron’s velocity, assuming it is nonrelativistic. (b) Calculate
the electron’s kinetic energy in eV.
Strategy
For part (a), since the de Broglie wavelength is given, the electron’s velocity can be obtained from by using
the nonrelativistic formula for momentum, For part (b), once is obtained (and it has been verified that is
nonrelativistic), the classical kinetic energy is simply
Solution for (a)
Substituting the nonrelativistic formula for momentum ( ) into the de Broglie wavelength gives
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1317
29.6 • The Wave Nature of Matter 1299
29.36
Solving for gives
29.37
Substituting known values yields
29.38
Solution for (b)
While fast compared with a car, this electron’s speed is not highly relativistic, and so we can comfortably use the
classical formula to find the electron’s kinetic energy and convert it to eV as requested.
29.39
Discussion
This low energy means that these 0.167-nm electrons could be obtained by accelerating them through a 54.0-V
electrostatic potential, an easy task. The results also confirm the assumption that the electrons are nonrelativistic,
since their velocity is just over 1% of the speed of light and the kinetic energy is about 0.01% of the rest energy of an
electron (0.511 MeV). If the electrons had turned out to be relativistic, we would have had to use more involved
calculations employing relativistic formulas.
Electron Microscopes
One consequence or use of the wave nature of matter is found in the electron microscope. As we have discussed,
there is a limit to the detail observed with any probe having a wavelength. Resolution, or observable detail, is limited
to about one wavelength. Since a potential of only 54 V can produce electrons with sub-nanometer wavelengths, it
is easy to get electrons with much smaller wavelengths than those of visible light (hundreds of nanometers).
Electron microscopes can, thus, be constructed to detect much smaller details than optical microscopes. (See
Figure 29.19.)
There are basically two types of electron microscopes. The transmission electron microscope (TEM) accelerates
electrons that are emitted from a hot filament (the cathode). The beam is broadened and then passes through the
sample. A magnetic lens focuses the beam image onto a fluorescent screen, a photographic plate, or (most
probably) a CCD (light sensitive camera), from which it is transferred to a computer. The TEM is similar to the optical
microscope, but it requires a thin sample examined in a vacuum. However it can resolve details as small as 0.1 nm
( ), providing magnifications of 100 million times the size of the original object. The TEM has allowed us to
see individual atoms and structure of cell nuclei.
The scanning electron microscope (SEM) provides images by using secondary electrons produced by the primary
beam interacting with the surface of the sample (seeFigure 29.19). The SEM also uses magnetic lenses to focus the
beam onto the sample. However, it moves the beam around electrically to “scan” the sample in thexandy
directions. A CCD detector is used to process the data for each electron position, producing images like the one at
the beginning of this chapter. The SEM has the advantage of not requiring a thin sample and of providing a 3-D view.
However, its resolution is about ten times less than a TEM.
PAGE: 1318
1300 29 • Quantum Physics
FIGURE29.19Schematic of a scanning electron microscope (SEM) (a) used to observe small details, such as those seen in this image of a
tooth of aHimipristis, a type of shark (b). (credit: Dallas Krentzel, Flickr)
Electrons were the first particles with mass to be directly confirmed to have the wavelength proposed by de Broglie.
Subsequently, protons, helium nuclei, neutrons, and many others have been observed to exhibit interference when
they interact with objects having sizes similar to their de Broglie wavelength. The de Broglie wavelength for
massless particles was well established in the 1920s for photons, and it has since been observed that all massless
particles have a de Broglie wavelength The wave nature of all particles is a universal characteristic of
nature. We shall see in following sections that implications of the de Broglie wavelength include the quantization of
energy in atoms and molecules, and an alteration of our basic view of nature on the microscopic scale. The next
section, for example, shows that there are limits to the precision with which we may make predictions, regardless of
how hard we try. There are even limits to the precision with which we may measure an object’s location or energy.
Making Connections: A Submicroscopic Diffraction Grating
The wave nature of matter allows it to exhibit all the characteristics of other, more familiar, waves. Diffraction
gratings, for example, produce diffraction patterns for light that depend on grating spacing and the wavelength
of the light. This effect, as with most wave phenomena, is most pronounced when the wave interacts with
objects having a size similar to its wavelength. For gratings, this is the spacing between multiple slits.) When
electrons interact with a system having a spacing similar to the electron wavelength, they show the same types
of interference patterns as light does for diffraction gratings, as shown at top left inFigure 29.20.
Atoms are spaced at regular intervals in a crystal as parallel planes, as shown in the bottom part ofFigure 29.20.
The spacings between these planes act like the openings in a diffraction grating. At certain incident angles, the
paths of electrons scattering from successive planes differ by one wavelength and, thus, interfere constructively.
At other angles, the path length differences are not an integral wavelength, and there is partial to total
destructive interference. This type of scattering from a large crystal with well-defined lattice planes can produce
dramatic interference patterns. It is calledBragg reflection, for the father-and-son team who first explored and
analyzed it in some detail. The expanded view also shows the path-length differences and indicates how these
depend on incident angle in a manner similar to the diffraction patterns for x rays reflecting from a crystal.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1319
29.7 • Probability: The Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle 1301
FIGURE29.20The diffraction pattern at top left is produced by scattering electrons from a crystal and is graphed as a function of
incident angle relative to the regular array of atoms in a crystal, as shown at bottom. Electrons scattering from the second layer of
atoms travel farther than those scattered from the top layer. If the path length difference (PLD) is an integral wavelength, there is
constructive interference.
Let us take the spacing between parallel planes of atoms in the crystal to be . As mentioned, if the path length
difference (PLD) for the electrons is a whole number of wavelengths, there will be constructive
interference—that is, . Because we have constructive
interference when This relationship is called theBragg equationand applies not only to electrons
but also to x rays.
The wavelength of matter is a submicroscopic characteristic that explains a macroscopic phenomenon such as
Bragg reflection. Similarly, the wavelength of light is a submicroscopic characteristic that explains the
macroscopic phenomenon of diffraction patterns.
29.7 Probability: The Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Use both versions of Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle in calculations.
• Explain the implications of Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle for measurements.
Probability Distribution
Matter and photons are waves, implying they are spread out over some distance. What is the position of a particle,
such as an electron? Is it at the center of the wave? The answer lies in how you measure the position of an electron.
Experiments show that you will find the electron at some definite location, unlike a wave. But if you set up exactly
the same situation and measure it again, you will find the electron in a different location, often far outside any
experimental uncertainty in your measurement. Repeated measurements will display a statistical distribution of
locations that appears wavelike. (SeeFigure 29.21.)
PAGE: 1320
1302 29 • Quantum Physics
FIGURE29.21The building up of the diffraction pattern of electrons scattered from a crystal surface. Each electron arrives at a definite
location, which cannot be precisely predicted. The overall distribution shown at the bottom can be predicted as the diffraction of waves
having the de Broglie wavelength of the electrons.
FIGURE29.22Double-slit interference for electrons (a) and photons (b) is identical for equal wavelengths and equal slit separations. Both
patterns are probability distributions in the sense that they are built up by individual particles traversing the apparatus, the paths of which
are not individually predictable.
After de Broglie proposed the wave nature of matter, many physicists, including Schrödinger and Heisenberg,
explored the consequences. The idea quickly emerged that,because of its wave character, a particle’s trajectory and
destination cannot be precisely predicted for each particle individually. However, each particle goes to a definite
place (as illustrated inFigure 29.21). After compiling enough data, you get a distribution related to the particle’s
wavelength and diffraction pattern. There is a certainprobabilityof finding the particle at a given location, and the
overall pattern is called aprobability distribution. Those who developed quantum mechanics devised equations
that predicted the probability distribution in various circumstances.
It is somewhat disquieting to think that you cannot predict exactly where an individual particle will go, or even
follow it to its destination. Let us explore what happens if we try to follow a particle. Consider the double-slit
patterns obtained for electrons and photons inFigure 29.22. First, we note that these patterns are identical,
following , the equation for double-slit constructive interference developed inPhoton Energies and the
Electromagnetic Spectrum, where is the slit separation and is the electron or photon wavelength.
Both patterns build up statistically as individual particles fall on the detector. This can be observed for photons or
electrons—for now, let us concentrate on electrons. You might imagine that the electrons are interfering with one
another as any waves do. To test this, you can lower the intensity until there is never more than one electron
between the slits and the screen. The same interference pattern builds up! This implies that a particle’s probability
distribution spans both slits, and the particles actually interfere with themselves. Does this also mean that the
electron goes through both slits? An electron is a basic unit of matter that is not divisible. But it is a fair question,
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1321
29.7 • Probability: The Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle 1303
and so we should look to see if the electron traverses one slit or the other, or both. One possibility is to have coils
around the slits that detect charges moving through them. What is observed is that an electron always goes through
one slit or the other; it does not split to go through both. But there is a catch. If you determine that the electron went
through one of the slits, you no longer get a double slit pattern—instead, you get single slit interference. There is no
escape by using another method of determining which slit the electron went through. Knowing the particle went
through one slit forces a single-slit pattern. If you do not observe which slit the electron goes through, you obtain a
double-slit pattern.
Heisenberg Uncertainty
How does knowing which slit the electron passed through change the pattern? The answer is fundamentally
important—measurement affects the system being observed. Information can be lost, and in some cases it is
impossible to measure two physical quantities simultaneously to exact precision. For example, you can measure the
position of a moving electron by scattering light or other electrons from it. Those probes have momentum
themselves, and by scattering from the electron, they change its momentumin a manner that loses information.
There is a limit to absolute knowledge, even in principle.
FIGURE29.23Werner Heisenberg was one of the best of those physicists who developed early quantum mechanics. Not only did his work
enable a description of nature on the very small scale, it also changed our view of the availability of knowledge. Although he is universally
recognized for his brilliance and the importance of his work (he received the Nobel Prize in 1932, for example), Heisenberg remained in
Germany during World War II and headed the German effort to build a nuclear bomb, permanently alienating himself from most of the
scientific community. (credit: Author Unknown, via Wikimedia Commons)
It was Werner Heisenberg who first stated this limit to knowledge in 1929 as a result of his work on quantum
mechanics and the wave characteristics of all particles. (SeeFigure 29.23). Specifically, consider simultaneously
measuring the position and momentum of an electron (it could be any particle). There is anuncertainty in position
that is approximately equal to the wavelength of the particle. That is,
29.40
As discussed above, a wave is not located at one point in space. If the electron’s position is measured repeatedly, a
spread in locations will be observed, implying an uncertainty in position . To detect the position of the particle,
we must interact with it, such as having it collide with a detector. In the collision, the particle will lose momentum.
This change in momentum could be anywhere from close to zero to the total momentum of the particle, . It
is not possible to tell how much momentum will be transferred to a detector, and so there is anuncertainty in
momentum , too. In fact, the uncertainty in momentum may be as large as the momentum itself, which in
equation form means that
29.41
PAGE: 1322
1304 29 • Quantum Physics
The uncertainty in position can be reduced by using a shorter-wavelength electron, since . But shortening
the wavelength increases the uncertainty in momentum, since . Conversely, the uncertainty in momentum
can be reduced by using a longer-wavelength electron, but this increases the uncertainty in position.
Mathematically, you can express this trade-off by multiplying the uncertainties. The wavelength cancels, leaving
29.42
So if one uncertainty is reduced, the other must increase so that their product is .
With the use of advanced mathematics, Heisenberg showed that the best that can be done in asimultaneous
measurement of position and momentumis
29.43
This is known as theHeisenberg uncertainty principle. It is impossible to measure position and momentum
simultaneously with uncertainties and that multiply to be less than . Neither uncertainty can be zero.
Neither uncertainty can become small without the other becoming large. A small wavelength allows accurate
position measurement, but it increases the momentum of the probe to the point that it further disturbs the
momentum of a system being measured. For example, if an electron is scattered from an atom and has a
wavelength small enough to detect the position of electrons in the atom, its momentum can knock the electrons
from their orbits in a manner that loses information about their original motion. It is therefore impossible to follow
an electron in its orbit around an atom. If you measure the electron’s position, you will find it in a definite location,
but the atom will be disrupted. Repeated measurements on identical atoms will produce interesting probability
distributions for electrons around the atom, but they will not produce motion information. The probability
distributions are referred to as electron clouds or orbitals. The shapes of these orbitals are often shown in general
chemistry texts and are discussed inThe Wave Nature of Matter Causes Quantization.
EXAMPLE 29.8
Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle in Position and Momentum for an Atom
(a) If the position of an electron in an atom is measured to an accuracy of 0.0100 nm, what is the electron’s
uncertainty in velocity? (b) If the electron has this velocity, what is its kinetic energy in eV?
Strategy
The uncertainty in position is the accuracy of the measurement, or . Thus the smallest uncertainty
in momentum can be calculated using . Once the uncertainty in momentum is found, the
uncertainty in velocity can be found from .
Solution for (a)
Using the equals sign in the uncertainty principle to express the minimum uncertainty, we have
29.44
Solving for and substituting known values gives
29.45
Thus,
29.46
Solving for and substituting the mass of an electron gives
29.47
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1323
29.7 • Probability: The Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle 1305
Solution for (b)
Although large, this velocity is not highly relativistic, and so the electron’s kinetic energy is
29.48
Discussion
Since atoms are roughly 0.1 nm in size, knowing the position of an electron to 0.0100 nm localizes it reasonably well
inside the atom. This would be like being able to see details one-tenth the size of the atom. But the consequent
uncertainty in velocity is large. You certainly could not follow it very well if its velocity is so uncertain. To get a further
idea of how large the uncertainty in velocity is, we assumed the velocity of the electron was equal to its uncertainty
and found this gave a kinetic energy of 95.5 eV. This is significantly greater than the typical energy difference
between levels in atoms (seeTable 29.1), so that it is impossible to get a meaningful energy for the electron if we
know its position even moderately well.
Why don’t we notice Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle in everyday life? The answer is that Planck’s constant is very
small. Thus the lower limit in the uncertainty of measuring the position and momentum of large objects is negligible.
We can detect sunlight reflected from Jupiter and follow the planet in its orbit around the Sun. The reflected
sunlight alters the momentum of Jupiter and creates an uncertainty in its momentum, but this is totally negligible
compared with Jupiter’s huge momentum. The correspondence principle tells us that the predictions of quantum
mechanics become indistinguishable from classical physics for large objects, which is the case here.
Heisenberg Uncertainty for Energy and Time
There is another form ofHeisenberg’s uncertainty principleforsimultaneous measurements of energy and time. In
equation form,
29.49
where is theuncertainty in energyand is theuncertainty in time. This means that within a time interval ,
it is not possible to measure energy precisely—there will be an uncertainty in the measurement. In order to
measure energy more precisely (to make smaller), we must increase . This time interval may be the amount
of time we take to make the measurement, or it could be the amount of time a particular state exists, as in the next
Example 29.9.
EXAMPLE 29.9
Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle for Energy and Time for an Atom
An atom in an excited state temporarily stores energy. If the lifetime of this excited state is measured to be
, what is the minimum uncertainty in the energy of the state in eV?
Strategy
The minimum uncertainty in energy is found by using the equals sign in and corresponds to a
reasonable choice for the uncertainty in time. The largest the uncertainty in time can be is the full lifetime of the
excited state, or .
Solution
Solving the uncertainty principle for and substituting known values gives
PAGE: 1324
1306 29 • Quantum Physics
29.50
Now converting to eV yields
29.51
Discussion
The lifetime of is typical of excited states in atoms—on human time scales, they quickly emit their stored
energy. An uncertainty in energy of only a few millionths of an eV results. This uncertainty is small compared with
typical excitation energies in atoms, which are on the order of 1 eV. So here the uncertainty principle limits the
accuracy with which we can measure the lifetime and energy of such states, but not very significantly.
The uncertainty principle for energy and time can be of great significance if the lifetime of a system is very short.
Then is very small, and is consequently very large. Some nuclei and exotic particles have extremely short
lifetimes (as small as ), causing uncertainties in energy as great as many GeV ( ). Stored energy
appears as increased rest mass, and so this means that there is significant uncertainty in the rest mass of short-
lived particles. When measured repeatedly, a spread of masses or decay energies are obtained. The spread is .
You might ask whether this uncertainty in energy could be avoided by not measuring the lifetime. The answer is no.
Nature knows the lifetime, and so its brevity affects the energy of the particle. This is so well established
experimentally that the uncertainty in decay energy is used to calculate the lifetime of short-lived states. Some
nuclei and particles are so short-lived that it is difficult to measure their lifetime. But if their decay energy can be
measured, its spread is , and this is used in the uncertainty principle ( ) to calculate the lifetime .
There is another consequence of the uncertainty principle for energy and time. If energy is uncertain by , then
conservation of energy can be violated by for a time . Neither the physicist nor nature can tell that
conservation of energy has been violated, if the violation is temporary and smaller than the uncertainty in energy.
While this sounds innocuous enough, we shall see in later chapters that it allows the temporary creation of matter
from nothing and has implications for how nature transmits forces over very small distances.
Finally, note that in the discussion of particles and waves, we have stated that individual measurements produce
precise or particle-like results. A definite position is determined each time we observe an electron, for example. But
repeated measurements produce a spread in values consistent with wave characteristics. The great theoretical
physicist Richard Feynman (1918–1988) commented, “What there are, are particles.” When you observe enough of
them, they distribute themselves as you would expect for a wave phenomenon. However, what there are as they
travel we cannot tell because, when we do try to measure, we affect the traveling.
29.8 The Particle-Wave Duality Reviewed
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the concept of particle-wave duality, and its scope.
Particle-wave duality—the fact that all particles have wave properties—is one of the cornerstones of quantum
mechanics. We first came across it in the treatment of photons, those particles of EM radiation that exhibit both
particle and wave properties, but not at the same time. Later it was noted that particles of matter have wave
properties as well. The dual properties of particles and waves are found for all particles, whether massless like
photons, or having a mass like electrons. (SeeFigure 29.24.)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1325
29.8 • The Particle-Wave Duality Reviewed 1307
FIGURE29.24On a quantum-mechanical scale (i.e., very small), particles with and without mass have wave properties. For example, both
electrons and photons have wavelengths but also behave as particles.
There are many submicroscopic particles in nature. Most have mass and are expected to act as particles, or the
smallest units of matter. All these masses have wave properties, with wavelengths given by the de Broglie
relationship . So, too, do combinations of these particles, such as nuclei, atoms, and molecules. As a
combination of masses becomes large, particularly if it is large enough to be called macroscopic, its wave nature
becomes difficult to observe. This is consistent with our common experience with matter.
Some particles in nature are massless. We have only treated the photon so far, but all massless entities travel at the
speed of light, have a wavelength, and exhibit particle and wave behaviors. They have momentum given by a
rearrangement of the de Broglie relationship, . In large combinations of these massless particles (such large
combinations are common only for photons or EM waves), there is mostly wave behavior upon detection, and the
particle nature becomes difficult to observe. This is also consistent with experience. (SeeFigure 29.25.)
FIGURE29.25On a classical scale (macroscopic), particles with mass behave as particles and not as waves. Particles without mass act as
waves and not as particles.
The particle-wave duality is a universal attribute. It is another connection between matter and energy. Not only has
modern physics been able to describe nature for high speeds and small sizes, it has also discovered new
connections and symmetries. There is greater unity and symmetry in nature than was known in the classical
era—but they were dreamt of. A beautiful poem written by the English poet William Blake some two centuries ago
contains the following four lines:
To see the World in a Grain of Sand
And a Heaven in a Wild Flower
Hold Infinity in the palm of your hand
And Eternity in an hour
Integrated Concepts
The problem set for this section involves concepts from this chapter and several others. Physics is most interesting
when applied to general situations involving more than a narrow set of physical principles. For example, photons
have momentum, hence the relevance ofLinear Momentum and Collisions. The following topics are involved in some
or all of the problems in this section:
• Dynamics: Newton’s Laws of Motion
• Work, Energy, and Energy Resources
• Linear Momentum and Collisions
• Heat and Heat Transfer Methods
PAGE: 1326
1308 29 • Quantum Physics
• Electric Potential and Electric Field
• Electric Current, Resistance, and Ohm’s Law
• Wave Optics
• Special Relativity
Problem-Solving Strategy
1. Identify which physical principles are involved.
2. Solve the problem using strategies outlined in the text.
Example 29.10illustrates how these strategies are applied to an integrated-concept problem.
EXAMPLE 29.10
Recoil of a Dust Particle after Absorbing a Photon
The following topics are involved in this integrated concepts worked example:
Photons (quantum mechanics)
Linear Momentum
TABLE29.2Topics
A 550-nm photon (visible light) is absorbed by a particle of dust in outer space. (a) Find the momentum of
such a photon. (b) What is the recoil velocity of the particle of dust, assuming it is initially at rest?
Strategy Step 1
To solve anintegrated-concept problem, such as those following this example, we must first identify the physical
principles involved and identify the chapters in which they are found. Part (a) of this example asks for the
momentum of a photon, a topic of the present chapter. Part (b) considersrecoil following a collision, a topic ofLinear
Momentum and Collisions.
Strategy Step 2
The following solutions to each part of the example illustrate how specific problem-solving strategies are applied.
These involve identifying knowns and unknowns, checking to see if the answer is reasonable, and so on.
Solution for (a)
The momentum of a photon is related to its wavelength by the equation:
29.52
Entering the known value for Planck’s constant and given the wavelength , we obtain
×
×
29.53
×
Discussion for (a)
This momentum is small, as expected from discussions in the text and the fact that photons of visible light carry
small amounts of energy and momentum compared with those carried by macroscopic objects.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1327
29.8 • The Particle-Wave Duality Reviewed 1309
Solution for (b)
Conservation of momentum in the absorption of this photon by a grain of dust can be analyzed using the equation:
29.54
The net external force is zero, since the dust is in outer space. Let 1 represent the photon and 2 the dust particle.
Before the collision, the dust is at rest (relative to some observer); after the collision, there is no photon (it is
absorbed). So conservation of momentum can be written
29.55
where is the photon momentum before the collision and is the dust momentum after the collision. The mass
and recoil velocity of the dust are and , respectively. Solving this for , the requested quantity, yields
29.56
where is the photon momentum found in part (a). Entering known values (noting that a microgram is )
gives
×
×
29.57
×
Discussion
The recoil velocity of the particle of dust is extremely small. As we have noted, however, there are immense
numbers of photons in sunlight and other macroscopic sources. In time, collisions and absorption of many photons
could cause a significant recoil of the dust, as observed in comet tails.
PAGE: 1328
1310 29 • Glossary
Glossary
atomic spectra the electromagnetic emission from materials eject electrons when light is shined on
atoms and molecules them
binding energy also called thework function; the photon a quantum, or particle, of electromagnetic
amount of energy necessary to eject an electron radiation
from a material photon energy the amount of energy a photon has;
blackbody an ideal radiator, which can radiate
equally well at all wavelengths photon momentum the amount of momentum a
blackbody radiation the electromagnetic radiation photon has, calculated by
from a blackbody Planck’s constant
bremsstrahlung German forbraking radiation; probability distribution the overall spatial
produced when electrons are decelerated distribution of probabilities to find a particle at a
characteristic x rays x rays whose energy depends given location
on the material they were produced in quantized the fact that certain physical entities exist
Compton effect the phenomenon whereby x rays only with particular discrete values and not every
scattered from materials have decreased energy conceivable value
correspondence principle in the classical limit (large, quantum mechanics the branch of physics that deals
slow-moving objects), quantum mechanics with small objects and with the quantization of
becomes the same as classical physics various entities, especially energy
de Broglie wavelength the wavelength possessed by ultraviolet radiation UV; ionizing photons slightly
a particle of matter, calculated by more energetic than violet light
gamma ray also -ray; highest-energy photon in the uncertainty in energy lack of precision or lack of
EM spectrum knowledge of precise results in measurements of
Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle a fundamental energy
limit to the precision with which pairs of quantities uncertainty in momentum lack of precision or lack of
(momentum and position, and energy and time) can knowledge of precise results in measurements of
be measured momentum
infrared radiation photons with energies slightly less uncertainty in position lack of precision or lack of
than red light knowledge of precise results in measurements of
ionizing radiation radiation that ionizes materials position
that absorb it uncertainty in time lack of precision or lack of
microwaves photons with wavelengths on the order knowledge of precise results in measurements of
of a micron ( ) time
particle-wave duality the property of behaving like visible light the range of photon energies the human
either a particle or a wave; the term for the eye can detect
phenomenon that all particles have wave x ray EM photon between -ray and UV in energy
characteristics
photoelectric effect the phenomenon whereby some
Section Summary
29.1Quantization of Energy energies of atoms and molecules in a blackbody
could increase or decrease only in steps of size
• The first indication that energy is sometimes
where is the frequency of the
quantized came from blackbody radiation, which is
oscillatory nature of the absorption and emission
the emission of EM radiation by an object with an
of EM radiation.
emissivity of 1.
• Another indication of energy levels being
• Planck recognized that the energy levels of the
quantized in atoms and molecules comes from the
emitting atoms and molecules were quantized,
lines in atomic spectra, which are the EM
with only the allowed values of
emissions of individual atoms and molecules.
where is any non-negative integer (0, 1, 2, 3, …).
29.2The Photoelectric Effect
• is Planck’s constant, whose value is
• The photoelectric effect is the process in which EM
• Thus, the oscillatory absorption and emission
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1329
29 • Conceptual Questions 1311
radiation ejects electrons from a material. the de Broglie wavelength, given by , where
• Einstein proposed photons to be quanta of EM
is momentum.
radiation having energy , where is the
• Matter is found to have the sameinterference
frequency of the radiation.
characteristicsas any other wave.
• All EM radiation is composed of photons. As
29.7Probability: The Heisenberg
Einstein explained, all characteristics of the
photoelectric effect are due to the interaction of Uncertainty Principle
individual photons with individual electrons.
• Matter is found to have the same interference
• The maximum kinetic energy of ejected
characteristics as any other wave.
electrons (photoelectrons) is given by
• There is now a probability distribution for the
, where is the photon energy
location of a particle rather than a definite
and BE is the binding energy (or work function) of
position.
the electron to the particular material.
• Another consequence of the wave character of all
29.3Photon Energies and the particles is the Heisenberg uncertainty principle,
Electromagnetic Spectrum which limits the precision with which certain
physical quantities can be known simultaneously.
• Photon energy is responsible for many
For position and momentum, the uncertainty
characteristics of EM radiation, being particularly
principle is , where is the
noticeable at high frequencies.
uncertainty in position and is the uncertainty in
• Photons have both wave and particle
momentum.
characteristics.
• For energy and time, the uncertainty principle is
29.4Photon Momentum where is the uncertainty in
energy and is the uncertainty in time.
• Photons have momentum, given by , where
• These small limits are fundamentally important on
is the photon wavelength.
the quantum-mechanical scale.
• Photon energy and momentum are related by
, where for a photon. 29.8The Particle-Wave Duality Reviewed
29.5The Particle-Wave Duality • The particle-wave duality refers to the fact that all
particles—those with mass and those without
• EM radiation can behave like either a particle or a
mass—have wave characteristics.
wave.
• This is a further connection between mass and
• This is termed particle-wave duality.
energy.
29.6The Wave Nature of Matter
• Particles of matter also have a wavelength, called
Conceptual Questions
29.1Quantization of Energy 5. Why don’t we notice quantization in everyday
events?
1. Give an example of a physical entity that is
quantized. State specifically what the entity is and
29.2The Photoelectric Effect
what the limits are on its values.
2. Give an example of a physical entity that is not 6. Is visible light the only type of EM radiation that can
quantized, in that it is continuous and may have a cause the photoelectric effect?
continuous range of values. 7. Which aspects of the photoelectric effect cannot be
3. What aspect of the blackbody spectrum forced explained without photons? Which can be explained
Planck to propose quantization of energy levels in without photons? Are the latter inconsistent with
its atoms and molecules? the existence of photons?
4. If Planck’s constant were large, say times 8. Is the photoelectric effect a direct consequence of
greater than it is, we would observe macroscopic the wave character of EM radiation or of the particle
entities to be quantized. Describe the motions of a character of EM radiation? Explain briefly.
child’s swing under such circumstances.
PAGE: 1330
1312 29 • Problems & Exercises
9. Insulators (nonmetals) have a higher BE than 17. Can a single microwave photon cause cell
metals, and it is more difficult for photons to eject damage? Explain.
electrons from insulators. Discuss how this relates 18. In an x-ray tube, the maximum photon energy is
to the free charges in metals that make them good given by Would it be technically more
conductors. correct to say where BE is the
10. If you pick up and shake a piece of metal that has binding energy of electrons in the target anode?
electrons in it free to move as a current, no Why isn’t the energy stated the latter way?
electrons fall out. Yet if you heat the metal,
electrons can be boiled off. Explain both of these 29.4Photon Momentum
facts as they relate to the amount and distribution
19. Which formula may be used for the momentum of
of energy involved with shaking the object as
all particles, with or without mass?
compared with heating it.
20. Is there any measurable difference between the
momentum of a photon and the momentum of
29.3Photon Energies and the
matter?
Electromagnetic Spectrum
21. Why don’t we feel the momentum of sunlight
11. Why are UV, x rays, and rays called ionizing when we are on the beach?
radiation?
12. How can treating food with ionizing radiation help 29.6The Wave Nature of Matter
keep it from spoiling? UV is not very penetrating.
22. How does the interference of water waves differ
What else could be used?
from the interference of electrons? How are they
13. Some television tubes are CRTs. They use an
analogous?
approximately 30-kV accelerating potential to
23. Describe one type of evidence for the wave nature
send electrons to the screen, where the electrons
of matter.
stimulate phosphors to emit the light that forms
24. Describe one type of evidence for the particle
the pictures we watch. Would you expect x rays
nature of EM radiation.
also to be created?
14. Tanning salons use “safe” UV with a longer
29.7Probability: The Heisenberg
wavelength than some of the UV in sunlight. This
Uncertainty Principle
“safe” UV has enough photon energy to trigger the
tanning mechanism. Is it likely to be able to cause 25. What is the Heisenberg uncertainty principle?
cell damage and induce cancer with prolonged Does it place limits on what can be known?
exposure?
15. Your pupils dilate when visible light intensity is 29.8The Particle-Wave Duality Reviewed
reduced. Does wearing sunglasses that lack UV
26. In what ways are matter and energy related that
blockers increase or decrease the UV hazard to
were not known before the development of
your eyes? Explain.
relativity and quantum mechanics?
16. One could feel heat transfer in the form of infrared
radiation from a large nuclear bomb detonated in
the atmosphere 75 km from you. However, none
of the profusely emitted x rays or rays reaches
you. Explain.
Problems & Exercises
29.1Quantization of Energy 3. A physicist is watching a 15-kg orangutan at a zoo
swing lazily in a tire at the end of a rope. He (the
1. A LiBr molecule oscillates with a frequency of
physicist) notices that each oscillation takes 3.00 s
(a) What is the difference in energy
and hypothesizes that the energy is quantized. (a)
in eV between allowed oscillator states? (b) What is
What is the difference in energy in joules between
the approximate value of for a state having an
allowed oscillator states? (b) What is the value of
energy of 1.0 eV?
for a state where the energy is 5.00 J? (c) Can the
2. The difference in energy between allowed oscillator
quantization be observed?
states in HBr molecules is 0.330 eV. What is the
oscillation frequency of this molecule?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1331
29 • Problems & Exercises 1313
29.2The Photoelectric Effect 17. (a) Calculate the number of photoelectrons per
second ejected from a 1.00-mm2area of sodium
4. What is the longest-wavelength EM radiation that
metal by 500-nm EM radiation having an intensity
can eject a photoelectron from silver, given that the
of (the intensity of sunlight above the
binding energy is 4.73 eV? Is this in the visible
Earth’s atmosphere). (b) Given that the binding
range?
energy is 2.28 eV, what power is carried away by
5. Find the longest-wavelength photon that can eject
the electrons? (c) The electrons carry away less
an electron from potassium, given that the binding
power than brought in by the photons. Where does
energy is 2.24 eV. Is this visible EM radiation?
the other power go? How can it be recovered?
6. What is the binding energy in eV of electrons in
18. Unreasonable Results
magnesium, if the longest-wavelength photon that
Red light having a wavelength of 700 nm is
can eject electrons is 337 nm?
projected onto magnesium metal to which
7. Calculate the binding energy in eV of electrons in
electrons are bound by 3.68 eV. (a) Use
aluminum, if the longest-wavelength photon that
to calculate the kinetic energy of
can eject them is 304 nm.
the ejected electrons. (b) What is unreasonable
8. What is the maximum kinetic energy in eV of
about this result? (c) Which assumptions are
electrons ejected from sodium metal by 450-nm
unreasonable or inconsistent?
EM radiation, given that the binding energy is 2.28
19. Unreasonable Results
eV?
(a) What is the binding energy of electrons to a
9. UV radiation having a wavelength of 120 nm falls on
material from which 4.00-eV electrons are ejected
gold metal, to which electrons are bound by 4.82
by 400-nm EM radiation? (b) What is
eV. What is the maximum kinetic energy of the
unreasonable about this result? (c) Which
ejected photoelectrons?
assumptions are unreasonable or inconsistent?
10. Violet light of wavelength 400 nm ejects electrons
with a maximum kinetic energy of 0.860 eV from
29.3Photon Energies and the
sodium metal. What is the binding energy of
Electromagnetic Spectrum
electrons to sodium metal?
11. UV radiation having a 300-nm wavelength falls on 20. What is the energy in joules and eV of a photon in
uranium metal, ejecting 0.500-eV electrons. What a radio wave from an AM station that has a
is the binding energy of electrons to uranium 1530-kHz broadcast frequency?
metal? 21. (a) Find the energy in joules and eV of photons in
12. What is the wavelength of EM radiation that ejects radio waves from an FM station that has a
2.00-eV electrons from calcium metal, given that 90.0-MHz broadcast frequency. (b) What does this
the binding energy is 2.71 eV? What type of EM imply about the number of photons per second
radiation is this? that the radio station must broadcast?
13. Find the wavelength of photons that eject 22. Calculate the frequency in hertz of a 1.00-MeV
0.100-eV electrons from potassium, given that the -ray photon.
binding energy is 2.24 eV. Are these photons 23. (a) What is the wavelength of a 1.00-eV photon?
visible? (b) Find its frequency in hertz. (c) Identify the type
14. What is the maximum velocity of electrons ejected of EM radiation.
from a material by 80-nm photons, if they are 24. Do the unit conversions necessary to show that
bound to the material by 4.73 eV? as stated in the text.
15. Photoelectrons from a material with a binding 25. Confirm the statement in the text that the range of
energy of 2.71 eV are ejected by 420-nm photons. photon energies for visible light is 1.63 to 3.26 eV,
Once ejected, how long does it take these given that the range of visible wavelengths is 380
electrons to travel 2.50 cm to a detection device? to 760 nm.
16. A laser with a power output of 2.00 mW at a
wavelength of 400 nm is projected onto calcium
metal. (a) How many electrons per second are
ejected? (b) What power is carried away by the
electrons, given that the binding energy is 2.71
eV?
PAGE: 1332
1314 29 • Problems & Exercises
26. (a) Calculate the energy in eV of an IR photon of 36. Assuming that 10.0% of a 100-W light bulb’s
frequency (b) How many of these energy output is in the visible range (typical for
photons would need to be absorbed incandescent bulbs) with an average wavelength
simultaneously by a tightly bound molecule to of 580 nm, and that the photons spread out
break it apart? (c) What is the energy in eV of a uniformly and are not absorbed by the
ray of frequency (d) How many atmosphere, how far away would you be if 500
tightly bound molecules could a single such ray photons per second enter the 3.00-mm diameter
break apart? pupil of your eye? (This number easily stimulates
27. Prove that, to three-digit accuracy, the retina.)
as stated in the text. 37. Construct Your Own Problem
28. (a) What is the maximum energy in eV of photons Consider a laser pen. Construct a problem in
produced in a CRT using a 25.0-kV accelerating which you calculate the number of photons per
potential, such as a color TV? (b) What is their second emitted by the pen. Among the things to
frequency? be considered are the laser pen’s wavelength and
29. What is the accelerating voltage of an x-ray tube power output. Your instructor may also wish for
that produces x rays with a shortest wavelength of you to determine the minimum diffraction
0.0103 nm? spreading in the beam and the number of photons
30. (a) What is the ratio of power outputs by two per square centimeter the pen can project at some
microwave ovens having frequencies of 950 and large distance. In this latter case, you will also
2560 MHz, if they emit the same number of need to consider the output size of the laser
photons per second? (b) What is the ratio of beam, the distance to the object being
photons per second if they have the same power illuminated, and any absorption or scattering
output? along the way.
31. How many photons per second are emitted by the
antenna of a microwave oven, if its power output 29.4Photon Momentum
is 1.00 kW at a frequency of 2560 MHz?
38. (a) Find the momentum of a 4.00-cm-wavelength
32. Some satellites use nuclear power. (a) If such a
microwave photon. (b) Discuss why you expect the
satellite emits a 1.00-W flux of rays having an
answer to (a) to be very small.
average energy of 0.500 MeV, how many are
39. (a) What is the momentum of a 0.0100-nm-
emitted per second? (b) These rays affect other
wavelength photon that could detect details of an
satellites. How far away must another satellite be
atom? (b) What is its energy in MeV?
to only receive one ray per second per square
40. (a) What is the wavelength of a photon that has a
meter?
momentum of ? (b) Find its
33. (a) If the power output of a 650-kHz radio station
energy in eV.
is 50.0 kW, how many photons per second are
41. (a) A -ray photon has a momentum of
produced? (b) If the radio waves are broadcast
. What is its wavelength? (b)
uniformly in all directions, find the number of
Calculate its energy in MeV.
photons per second per square meter at a
42. (a) Calculate the momentum of a photon having a
distance of 100 km. Assume no reflection from the
wavelength of . (b) Find the velocity of an
ground or absorption by the air.
electron having the same momentum. (c) What is
34. How many x-ray photons per second are created
the kinetic energy of the electron, and how does it
by an x-ray tube that produces a flux of x rays
compare with that of the photon?
having a power of 1.00 W? Assume the average
43. Repeat the previous problem for a 10.0-nm-
energy per photon is 75.0 keV.
wavelength photon.
35. (a) How far away must you be from a 650-kHz
44. (a) Calculate the wavelength of a photon that has
radio station with power 50.0 kW for there to be
the same momentum as a proton moving at
only one photon per second per square meter?
1.00% of the speed of light. (b) What is the energy
Assume no reflections or absorption, as if you
of the photon in MeV? (c) What is the kinetic
were in deep outer space. (b) Discuss the
energy of the proton in MeV?
implications for detecting intelligent life in other
45. (a) Find the momentum of a 100-keV x-ray
solar systems by detecting their radio broadcasts.
photon. (b) Find the equivalent velocity of a
neutron with the same momentum. (c) What is the
neutron’s kinetic energy in keV?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1333
29 • Problems & Exercises 1315
46. Take the ratio of relativistic rest energy, 58. (a) Calculate the velocity of an electron that has a
, to relativistic momentum, wavelength of (b) Through what voltage
, and show that in the limit that mass must the electron be accelerated to have this
approaches zero, you find . velocity?
47. Construct Your Own Problem 59. The velocity of a proton emerging from a Van de
Consider a space sail such as mentioned in Graaff accelerator is 25.0% of the speed of light.
Example 29.5. Construct a problem in which you (a) What is the proton’s wavelength? (b) What is its
calculate the light pressure on the sail in kinetic energy, assuming it is nonrelativistic? (c)
produced by reflecting sunlight. Also calculate the What was the equivalent voltage through which it
force that could be produced and how much effect was accelerated?
that would have on a spacecraft. Among the things 60. The kinetic energy of an electron accelerated in an
to be considered are the intensity of sunlight, its x-ray tube is 100 keV. Assuming it is
average wavelength, the number of photons per nonrelativistic, what is its wavelength?
square meter this implies, the area of the space 61. Unreasonable Results
sail, and the mass of the system being (a) Assuming it is nonrelativistic, calculate the
accelerated. velocity of an electron with a 0.100-fm
48. Unreasonable Results wavelength (small enough to detect details of a
A car feels a small force due to the light it sends nucleus). (b) What is unreasonable about this
out from its headlights, equal to the momentum of result? (c) Which assumptions are unreasonable
the light divided by the time in which it is emitted. or inconsistent?
(a) Calculate the power of each headlight, if they
exert a total force of backward on 29.7Probability: The Heisenberg
the car. (b) What is unreasonable about this Uncertainty Principle
result? (c) Which assumptions are unreasonable
62. (a) If the position of an electron in a membrane is
or inconsistent?
measured to an accuracy of , what is the
electron’s minimum uncertainty in velocity? (b) If
29.6The Wave Nature of Matter
the electron has this velocity, what is its kinetic
49. At what velocity will an electron have a energy in eV? (c) What are the implications of this
wavelength of 1.00 m? energy, comparing it to typical molecular binding
50. What is the wavelength of an electron moving at energies?
3.00% of the speed of light? 63. (a) If the position of a chlorine ion in a membrane
51. At what velocity does a proton have a 6.00-fm is measured to an accuracy of , what is its
wavelength (about the size of a nucleus)? Assume minimum uncertainty in velocity, given its mass is
the proton is nonrelativistic. (1 femtometer = ? (b) If the ion has this velocity,
) what is its kinetic energy in eV, and how does this
52. What is the velocity of a 0.400-kg billiard ball if its compare with typical molecular binding energies?
wavelength is 7.50 cm (large enough for it to 64. Suppose the velocity of an electron in an atom is
interfere with other billiard balls)? known to an accuracy of
53. Find the wavelength of a proton moving at 1.00% (reasonably accurate compared with orbital
of the speed of light. velocities). What is the electron’s minimum
54. Experiments are performed with ultracold uncertainty in position, and how does this
neutrons having velocities as small as 1.00 m/s. compare with the approximate 0.1-nm size of the
(a) What is the wavelength of such a neutron? (b) atom?
What is its kinetic energy in eV? 65. The velocity of a proton in an accelerator is known
55. (a) Find the velocity of a neutron that has a to an accuracy of 0.250% of the speed of light.
6.00-fm wavelength (about the size of a nucleus). (This could be small compared with its velocity.)
Assume the neutron is nonrelativistic. (b) What is What is the smallest possible uncertainty in its
the neutron’s kinetic energy in MeV? position?
56. What is the wavelength of an electron accelerated 66. A relatively long-lived excited state of an atom has
through a 30.0-kV potential, as in a TV tube? a lifetime of 3.00 ms. What is the minimum
57. What is the kinetic energy of an electron in a TEM uncertainty in its energy?
having a 0.0100-nm wavelength?
PAGE: 1334
1316 29 • Problems & Exercises
67. (a) The lifetime of a highly unstable nucleus is 75. Integrated Concepts
. What is the smallest uncertainty in its On its high power setting, a microwave oven
decay energy? (b) Compare this with the rest produces 900 W of 2560 MHz microwaves. (a)
energy of an electron. How many photons per second is this? (b) How
68. The decay energy of a short-lived particle has an many photons are required to increase the
uncertainty of 1.0 MeV due to its short lifetime. temperature of a 0.500-kg mass of pasta by
What is the smallest lifetime it can have? , assuming a specific heat of
69. The decay energy of a short-lived nuclear excited ? Neglect all other heat transfer.
state has an uncertainty of 2.0 eV due to its short (c) How long must the microwave operator wait for
lifetime. What is the smallest lifetime it can have? their pasta to be ready?
70. What is the approximate uncertainty in the mass 76. Integrated Concepts
of a muon, as determined from its decay lifetime? (a) Calculate the amount of microwave energy in
71. Derive the approximate form of Heisenberg’s joules needed to raise the temperature of 1.00 kg
uncertainty principle for energy and time, of soup from to . (b) What is the total
, using the following arguments: Since momentum of all the microwave photons it takes
the position of a particle is uncertain by , to do this? (c) Calculate the velocity of a 1.00-kg
where is the wavelength of the photon used to mass with the same momentum. (d) What is the
examine it, there is an uncertainty in the time the kinetic energy of this mass?
photon takes to traverse . Furthermore, the 77. Integrated Concepts
photon has an energy related to its wavelength, (a) What is for an electron emerging from the
and it can transfer some or all of this energy to the Stanford Linear Accelerator with a total energy of
object being examined. Thus the uncertainty in the 50.0 GeV? (b) Find its momentum. (c) What is the
energy of the object is also related to . Find electron’s wavelength?
and ; then multiply them to give the 78. Integrated Concepts
approximate uncertainty principle. (a) What is for a proton having an energy of 1.00
TeV, produced by the Fermilab accelerator? (b)
29.8The Particle-Wave Duality Reviewed Find its momentum. (c) What is the proton’s
wavelength?
72. Integrated Concepts
79. Integrated Concepts
The 54.0-eV electron inExample 29.7has a
An electron microscope passes 1.00-pm-
0.167-nm wavelength. If such electrons are
wavelength electrons through a circular aperture
passed through a double slit and have their first
in diameter. What is the angle between
maximum at an angle of , what is the slit
two just-resolvable point sources for this
separation ?
microscope?
73. Integrated Concepts
80. Integrated Concepts
An electron microscope produces electrons with a
(a) Calculate the velocity of electrons that form
2.00-pm wavelength. If these are passed through
the same pattern as 450-nm light when passed
a 1.00-nm single slit, at what angle will the first
through a double slit. (b) Calculate the kinetic
diffraction minimum be found?
energy of each and compare them. (c) Would
74. Integrated Concepts
either be easier to generate than the other?
A certain heat lamp emits 200 W of mostly IR
Explain.
radiation averaging 1500 nm in wavelength. (a)
81. Integrated Concepts
What is the average photon energy in joules? (b)
(a) What is the separation between double slits
How many of these photons are required to
that produces a second-order minimum at
increase the temperature of a person’s shoulder
for 650-nm light? (b) What slit separation is
by , assuming the affected mass is 4.0 kg
needed to produce the same pattern for 1.00-keV
with a specific heat of . Also
protons.
assume no other significant heat transfer. (c) How
long does this take?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1335
29 • Problems & Exercises 1317
82. Integrated Concepts 85. Integrated Concepts
A laser with a power output of 2.00 mW at a The momentum of light is exactly reversed when
wavelength of 400 nm is projected onto calcium reflected straight back from a mirror, assuming
metal. (a) How many electrons per second are negligible recoil of the mirror. Thus the change in
ejected? (b) What power is carried away by the momentum is twice the photon momentum.
electrons, given that the binding energy is 2.71 Suppose light of intensity reflects
eV? (c) Calculate the current of ejected electrons. from a mirror of area . (a) Calculate the
(d) If the photoelectric material is electrically energy reflected in 1.00 s. (b) What is the
insulated and acts like a 2.00-pF capacitor, how momentum imparted to the mirror? (c) Using the
long will current flow before the capacitor voltage most general form of Newton’s second law, what
stops it? is the force on the mirror? (d) Does the
83. Integrated Concepts assumption of no mirror recoil seem reasonable?
One problem with x rays is that they are not 86. Integrated Concepts
sensed. Calculate the temperature increase of a Sunlight above the Earth’s atmosphere has an
researcher exposed in a few seconds to a nearly intensity of . If this is reflected
fatal accidental dose of x rays under the following straight back from a mirror that has only a small
conditions. The energy of the x-ray photons is 200 recoil, the light’s momentum is exactly reversed,
keV, and of them are absorbed per giving the mirror twice the incident momentum.
kilogram of tissue, the specific heat of which is (a) Calculate the force per square meter of mirror.
. (Note that medical diagnostic (b) Very low mass mirrors can be constructed in
x-ray machinescannotproduce an intensity this the near weightlessness of space, and attached to
great.) a spaceship to sail it. Once done, the average
84. Integrated Concepts mass per square meter of the spaceship is 0.100
A 1.00-fm photon has a wavelength short enough kg. Find the acceleration of the spaceship if all
to detect some information about nuclei. (a) What other forces are balanced. (c) How fast is it moving
is the photon momentum? (b) What is its energy in 24 hours later?
joules and MeV? (c) What is the (relativistic) 87. Critical ThinkingA photon of light with a
velocity of an electron with the same momentum? wavelength of 550.0 nm is involved in a collision
(d) Calculate the electron’s kinetic energy. with an electron. Use for
Planck’s constant. (a) How much momentum does
the photon have before the collision? (b) If the
wavelength of the photon leaving the collision is
650.0 nm, how much momentum does the photon
have? (c) Does the momentum have to be
conserved in every direction? (d) Does a longer
wavelength imply more or less momentum than a
shorter wavelength?
PAGE: 1336
1318 29 • Problems & Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1337
CHAPTER 30
Atomic Physics
FIGURE30.1Individual carbon atoms are visible in this image of a carbon nanotube made by a scanning tunneling electron microscope.
(credit: Taner Yildirim, National Institute of Standards and Technology, via Wikimedia Commons)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
30.1Discovery of the Atom
30.2Discovery of the Parts of the Atom: Electrons and Nuclei
30.3Bohr’s Theory of the Hydrogen Atom
30.4X Rays: Atomic Origins and Applications
30.5Applications of Atomic Excitations and De-Excitations
30.6The Wave Nature of Matter Causes Quantization
30.7Patterns in Spectra Reveal More Quantization
30.8Quantum Numbers and Rules
30.9The Pauli Exclusion Principle
INTRODUCTION TO ATOMIC PHYSICS From childhood on, we learn that atoms are a substructure of all things
around us, from the air we breathe to the autumn leaves that blanket a forest trail. Invisible to the eye, the existence
and properties of atoms are used to explain many phenomena—a theme found throughout this text. In this chapter,
we discuss the discovery of atoms and their own substructures; we then apply quantum mechanics to the
description of atoms, and their properties and interactions. Along the way, we will find, much like the scientists who
made the original discoveries, that new concepts emerge with applications far beyond the boundaries of atomic
physics.
30.1 Discovery of the Atom
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the basic structure of the atom, the substructure of all matter.
How do we know that atoms are really there if we cannot see them with our eyes? A brief account of the progression
from the proposal of atoms by the Greeks to the first direct evidence of their existence follows.
People have long speculated about the structure of matter and the existence of atoms. The earliest significant ideas
to survive are due to the ancient Greeks in the fifth century BCE, especially those of the philosophers Leucippus and
Democritus. (There is some evidence that philosophers in both India and China made similar speculations, at about
the same time.) They considered the question of whether a substance can be divided without limit into ever smaller
pieces. There are only a few possible answers to this question. One is that infinitesimally small subdivision is
PAGE: 1338
1320 30 • Atomic Physics
possible. Another is what Democritus in particular believed—that there is a smallest unit that cannot be further
subdivided. Democritus called this theatom. We now know that atoms themselves can be subdivided, but their
identity is destroyed in the process, so the Greeks were correct in a respect. The Greeks also felt that atoms were in
constant motion, another correct notion.
The Greeks and others speculated about the properties of atoms, proposing that only a few types existed and that
all matter was formed as various combinations of these types. The famous proposal that the basic elements were
earth, air, fire, and water was brilliant, but incorrect. The Greeks had identified the most common examples of the
four states of matter (solid, gas, plasma, and liquid), rather than the basic elements. More than 2000 years passed
before observations could be made with equipment capable of revealing the true nature of atoms.
Over the centuries, discoveries were made regarding the properties of substances and their chemical reactions.
Certain systematic features were recognized, but similarities between common and rare elements resulted in efforts
to transmute them (lead into gold, in particular) for financial gain. Secrecy was endemic. Alchemists discovered and
rediscovered many facts but did not make them broadly available. As the Middle Ages ended, alchemy gradually
faded, and the science of chemistry arose. It was no longer possible, nor considered desirable, to keep discoveries
secret. Collective knowledge grew, and by the beginning of the 19th century, an important fact was well
established—the masses of reactants in specific chemical reactions always have a particular mass ratio. This is very
strong indirect evidence that there are basic units (atoms and molecules) that have these same mass ratios. The
English chemist John Dalton (1766–1844) did much of this work, with significant contributions by the Italian
physicist Amedeo Avogadro (1776–1856). It was Avogadro who developed the idea of a fixed number of atoms and
molecules in a mole, and this special number is called Avogadro’s number in his honor. The Austrian physicist
Johann Josef Loschmidt was the first to measure the value of the constant in 1865 using the kinetic theory of gases.
Patterns and Systematics
The recognition and appreciation of patterns has enabled us to make many discoveries. The periodic table of
elements was proposed as an organized summary of the known elements long before all elements had been
discovered, and it led to many other discoveries. We shall see in later chapters that patterns in the properties of
subatomic particles led to the proposal of quarks as their underlying structure, an idea that is still bearing fruit.
Knowledge of the properties of elements and compounds grew, culminating in the mid-19th-century development
of the periodic table of the elements by Dmitri Mendeleev (1834–1907), the great Russian chemist. Mendeleev
proposed an ingenious array that highlighted the periodic nature of the properties of elements. Believing in the
systematics of the periodic table, he also predicted the existence of then-unknown elements to complete it. Once
these elements were discovered and determined to have properties predicted by Mendeleev, his periodic table
became universally accepted.
Also during the 19th century, the kinetic theory of gases was developed. Kinetic theory is based on the existence of
atoms and molecules in random thermal motion and provides a microscopic explanation of the gas laws, heat
transfer, and thermodynamics (seeIntroduction to Temperature, Kinetic Theory, and the Gas LawsandIntroduction
to Laws of Thermodynamics). Kinetic theory works so well that it is another strong indication of the existence of
atoms. But it is still indirect evidence—individual atoms and molecules had not been observed. There were heated
debates about the validity of kinetic theory until direct evidence of atoms was obtained.
The first truly direct evidence of atoms is credited to Robert Brown, a Scottish botanist. In 1827, he noticed that tiny
pollen grains suspended in still water moved about in complex paths. This can be observed with a microscope for
any small particles in a fluid. The motion is caused by the random thermal motions of fluid molecules colliding with
particles in the fluid, and it is now calledBrownian motion. (SeeFigure 30.2.) Statistical fluctuations in the numbers
of molecules striking the sides of a visible particle cause it to move first this way, then that. Although the molecules
cannot be directly observed, their effects on the particle can be. By examining Brownian motion, the size of
molecules can be calculated. The smaller and more numerous they are, the smaller the fluctuations in the numbers
striking different sides.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1339
30.1 • Discovery of the Atom 1321
FIGURE30.2The position of a pollen grain in water, measured every few seconds under a microscope, exhibits Brownian motion. Brownian
motion is due to fluctuations in the number of atoms and molecules colliding with a small mass, causing it to move about in complex paths.
This is nearly direct evidence for the existence of atoms, providing a satisfactory alternative explanation cannot be found.
It was Albert Einstein who, starting in his epochal year of 1905, published several papers that explained precisely
how Brownian motion could be used to measure the size of atoms and molecules. (In 1905 Einstein created special
relativity, proposed photons as quanta of EM radiation, and produced a theory of Brownian motion that allowed the
size of atoms to be determined. All of this was done in his spare time, since he worked days as a patent examiner.
Any one of these very basic works could have been the crowning achievement of an entire career—yet Einstein did
even more in later years.) Their sizes were only approximately known to be , based on a comparison of
latent heat of vaporization and surface tension made in about 1805 by Thomas Young of double-slit fame and the
famous astronomer and mathematician Simon Laplace.
Using Einstein’s ideas, the French physicist Jean-Baptiste Perrin (1870–1942) carefully observed Brownian motion;
not only did he confirm Einstein’s theory, he also produced accurate sizes for atoms and molecules. Since molecular
weights and densities of materials were well established, knowing atomic and molecular sizes allowed a precise
value for Avogadro’s number to be obtained. (If we know how big an atom is, we know how many fit into a certain
volume.) Perrin also used these ideas to explain atomic and molecular agitation effects in sedimentation, and he
received the 1926 Nobel Prize for his achievements. Most scientists were already convinced of the existence of
atoms, but the accurate observation and analysis of Brownian motion was conclusive—it was the first truly direct
evidence.
A huge array of direct and indirect evidence for the existence of atoms now exists. For example, it has become
possible to accelerate ions (much as electrons are accelerated in cathode-ray tubes) and to detect them individually
as well as measure their masses (seeMore Applications of Magnetismfor a discussion of mass spectrometers).
Other devices that observe individual atoms, such as the scanning tunneling electron microscope, will be discussed
elsewhere. (SeeFigure 30.3.) All of our understanding of the properties of matter is based on and consistent with
the atom. The atom’s substructures, such as electron shells and the nucleus, are both interesting and important.
The nucleus in turn has a substructure, as do the particles of which it is composed. These topics, and the question of
whether there is a smallest basic structure to matter, will be explored in later parts of the text.
FIGURE30.3Individual atoms can be detected with devices such as the scanning tunneling electron microscope that produced this image
of individual gold atoms on a graphite substrate. (credit: Erwin Rossen, Eindhoven University of Technology, via Wikimedia Commons)
PAGE: 1340
1322 30 • Atomic Physics
30.2 Discovery of the Parts of the Atom: Electrons and Nuclei
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe how electrons were discovered.
• Explain the Millikan oil drop experiment.
• Describe Rutherford’s gold foil experiment.
• Describe Rutherford’s planetary model of the atom.
Just as atoms are a substructure of matter, electrons and nuclei are substructures of the atom. The experiments
that were used to discover electrons and nuclei reveal some of the basic properties of atoms and can be readily
understood using ideas such as electrostatic and magnetic force, already covered in previous chapters.
Charges and Electromagnetic Forces
In previous discussions, we have noted that positive charge is associated with nuclei and negative charge with
electrons. We have also covered many aspects of the electric and magnetic forces that affect charges. We will
now explore the discovery of the electron and nucleus as substructures of the atom and examine their
contributions to the properties of atoms.
The Electron
Gas discharge tubes, such as that shown inFigure 30.4, consist of an evacuated glass tube containing two metal
electrodes and a rarefied gas. When a high voltage is applied to the electrodes, the gas glows. These tubes were the
precursors to today’s neon lights. They were first studied seriously by Heinrich Geissler, a German inventor and
glassblower, starting in the 1860s. The English scientist William Crookes, among others, continued to study what for
some time were called Crookes tubes, wherein electrons are freed from atoms and molecules in the rarefied gas
inside the tube and are accelerated from the cathode (negative) to the anode (positive) by the high potential. These
“cathode rays” collide with the gas atoms and molecules and excite them, resulting in the emission of
electromagnetic (EM) radiation that makes the electrons’ path visible as a ray that spreads and fades as it moves
away from the cathode.
Gas discharge tubes today are most commonly calledcathode-ray tubes, because the rays originate at the cathode.
Crookes showed that the electrons carry momentum (they can make a small paddle wheel rotate). He also found
that their normally straight path is bent by a magnet in the direction expected for a negative charge moving away
from the cathode. These were the first direct indications of electrons and their charge.
FIGURE30.4A gas discharge tube glows when a high voltage is applied to it. Electrons emitted from the cathode are accelerated toward
the anode; they excite atoms and molecules in the gas, which glow in response. Once called Geissler tubes and later Crookes tubes, they
are now known as cathode-ray tubes (CRTs) and are found in older TVs, computer screens, and x-ray machines. When a magnetic field is
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1341
30.2 • Discovery of the Parts of the Atom: Electrons and Nuclei 1323
applied, the beam bends in the direction expected for negative charge. (credit: Paul Downey, Flickr)
The English physicist J. J. Thomson (1856–1940) improved and expanded the scope of experiments with gas
discharge tubes. (SeeFigure 30.5andFigure 30.6.) He verified the negative charge of the cathode rays with both
magnetic and electric fields. Additionally, he collected the rays in a metal cup and found an excess of negative
charge. Thomson was also able to measure the ratio of the charge of the electron to its mass, —an important
step to finding the actual values of both and .Figure 30.7shows a cathode-ray tube, which produces a narrow
beam of electrons that passes through charging plates connected to a high-voltage power supply. An electric field
is produced between the charging plates, and the cathode-ray tube is placed between the poles of a magnet so that
the electric field is perpendicular to the magnetic field of the magnet. These fields, being perpendicular to each
other, produce opposing forces on the electrons. As discussed for mass spectrometers inMore Applications of
Magnetism, if the net force due to the fields vanishes, then the velocity of the charged particle is . In this
manner, Thomson determined the velocity of the electrons and then moved the beam up and down by adjusting the
electric field.
FIGURE30.5J. J. Thomson (credit: www.firstworldwar.com, via Wikimedia Commons)
FIGURE30.6Diagram of Thomson’s CRT. (credit: Kurzon, Wikimedia Commons)
PAGE: 1342
1324 30 • Atomic Physics
FIGURE30.7This schematic shows the electron beam in a CRT passing through crossed electric and magnetic fields and causing phosphor
to glow when striking the end of the tube.
To see how the amount of deflection is used to calculate , note that the deflection is proportional to the
electric force on the electron:
30.1
But the vertical deflection is also related to the electron’s mass, since the electron’s acceleration is
30.2
The value of is not known, since was not yet known. Substituting the expression for electric force into the
expression for acceleration yields
30.3
Gathering terms, we have
30.4
The deflection is analyzed to get , and is determined from the applied voltage and distance between the plates;
thus, can be determined. With the velocity known, another measurement of can be obtained by bending the
beam of electrons with the magnetic field. Since , we have . Consistent results
are obtained using magnetic deflection.
What is so important about , the ratio of the electron’s charge to its mass? The value obtained is
30.5
This is a huge number, as Thomson realized, and it implies that the electron has a very small mass. It was known
from electroplating that about is needed to plate a material, a factor of about 1000 less than the charge
per kilogram of electrons. Thomson went on to do the same experiment for positively charged hydrogen ions (now
known to be bare protons) and found a charge per kilogram about 1000 times smaller than that for the electron,
implying that the proton is about 1000 times more massive than the electron. Today, we know more precisely that
30.6
where is the charge of the proton and is its mass. This ratio (to four significant figures) is 1836 times less
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1343
30.2 • Discovery of the Parts of the Atom: Electrons and Nuclei 1325
charge per kilogram than for the electron. Since the charges of electrons and protons are equal in magnitude, this
implies .
Thomson performed a variety of experiments using differing gases in discharge tubes and employing other methods,
such as the photoelectric effect, for freeing electrons from atoms. He always found the same properties for the
electron, proving it to be an independent particle. For his work, the important pieces of which he began to publish in
1897, Thomson was awarded the 1906 Nobel Prize in Physics. In retrospect, it is difficult to appreciate how
astonishing it was to find that the atom has a substructure. Thomson himself said, “It was only when I was
convinced that the experiment left no escape from it that I published my belief in the existence of bodies smaller
than atoms.”
Thomson attempted to measure the charge of individual electrons, but his method could determine its charge only
to the order of magnitude expected.
Since Faraday’s experiments with electroplating in the 1830s, it had been known that about 100,000 C per mole
was needed to plate singly ionized ions. Dividing this by the number of ions per mole (that is, by Avogadro’s
number), which was approximately known, the charge per ion was calculated to be about , close to
the actual value.
An American physicist, Robert Millikan (1868–1953) (seeFigure 30.8), decided to improve upon Thomson’s
experiment for measuring and was eventually forced to try another approach, which is now a classic experiment
performed by students. The Millikan oil drop experiment is shown inFigure 30.9.
FIGURE30.8Robert Millikan (credit: Unknown Author, via Wikimedia Commons)
FIGURE30.9The Millikan oil drop experiment produced the first accurate direct measurement of the charge on electrons, one of the most
fundamental constants in nature. Fine drops of oil become charged when sprayed. Their movement is observed between metal plates with
a potential applied to oppose the gravitational force. The balance of gravitational and electric forces allows the calculation of the charge on
a drop. The charge is found to be quantized in units of , thus determining directly the charge of the excess and missing
PAGE: 1344
1326 30 • Atomic Physics
electrons on the oil drops.
In the Millikan oil drop experiment, fine drops of oil are sprayed from an atomizer. Some of these are charged by the
process and can then be suspended between metal plates by a voltage between the plates. In this situation, the
weight of the drop is balanced by the electric force:
30.7
The electric field is produced by the applied voltage, hence, , and is adjusted to just balance the drop’s
weight. The drops can be seen as points of reflected light using a microscope, but they are too small to directly
measure their size and mass. The mass of the drop is determined by observing how fast it falls when the voltage is
turned off. Since air resistance is very significant for these submicroscopic drops, the more massive drops fall faster
than the less massive, and sophisticated sedimentation calculations can reveal their mass. Oil is used rather than
water, because it does not readily evaporate, and so mass is nearly constant. Once the mass of the drop is known,
the charge of the electron is given by rearranging the previous equation:
30.8
where is the separation of the plates and is the voltage that holds the drop motionless. (The same drop can be
observed for several hours to see that it really is motionless.) By 1913 Millikan had measured the charge of the
electron to an accuracy of 1%, and he improved this by a factor of 10 within a few years to a value of
. He also observed that all charges were multiples of the basic electron charge and that sudden
changes could occur in which electrons were added or removed from the drops. For this very fundamental direct
measurement of and for his studies of the photoelectric effect, Millikan was awarded the 1923 Nobel Prize in
Physics.
With the charge of the electron known and the charge-to-mass ratio known, the electron’s mass can be calculated.
It is
30.9
Substituting known values yields
30.10
or
30.11
where the round-off errors have been corrected. The mass of the electron has been verified in many subsequent
experiments and is now known to an accuracy of better than one part in one million. It is an incredibly small mass
and remains the smallest known mass of any particle that has mass. (Some particles, such as photons, are massless
and cannot be brought to rest, but travel at the speed of light.) A similar calculation gives the masses of other
particles, including the proton. To three digits, the mass of the proton is now known to be
30.12
which is nearly identical to the mass of a hydrogen atom. What Thomson and Millikan had done was to prove the
existence of one substructure of atoms, the electron, and further to show that it had only a tiny fraction of the mass
of an atom. The nucleus of an atom contains most of its mass, and the nature of the nucleus was completely
unanticipated.
Another important characteristic of quantum mechanics was also beginning to emerge. All electrons are identical to
one another. The charge and mass of electrons are not average values; rather, they are unique values that all
electrons have. This is true of other fundamental entities at the submicroscopic level. All protons are identical to one
another, and so on.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1345
30.2 • Discovery of the Parts of the Atom: Electrons and Nuclei 1327
The Nucleus
Here, we examine the first direct evidence of the size and mass of the nucleus. In later chapters, we will examine
many other aspects of nuclear physics, but the basic information on nuclear size and mass is so important to
understanding the atom that we consider it here.
Nuclear radioactivity was discovered in 1896, and it was soon the subject of intense study by a number of the best
scientists in the world. Among them was New Zealander Lord Ernest Rutherford, who made numerous fundamental
discoveries and earned the title of “father of nuclear physics.” Born in Nelson, Rutherford did his postgraduate
studies at the Cavendish Laboratories in England before taking up a position at McGill University in Canada where he
did the work that earned him a Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1908. In the area of atomic and nuclear physics, there is
much overlap between chemistry and physics, with physics providing the fundamental enabling theories. He
returned to England in later years and had six future Nobel Prize winners as students. Rutherford used nuclear
radiation to directly examine the size and mass of the atomic nucleus. The experiment he devised is shown inFigure
30.10. A radioactive source that emits alpha radiation was placed in a lead container with a hole in one side to
produce a beam of alpha particles, which are a type of ionizing radiation ejected by the nuclei of a radioactive
source. A thin gold foil was placed in the beam, and the scattering of the alpha particles was observed by the glow
they caused when they struck a phosphor screen.
FIGURE30.10Rutherford’s experiment gave direct evidence for the size and mass of the nucleus by scattering alpha particles from a thin
gold foil. Alpha particles with energies of about are emitted from a radioactive source (which is a small metal container in which a
specific amount of a radioactive material is sealed), are collimated into a beam, and fall upon the foil. The number of particles that
penetrate the foil or scatter to various angles indicates that gold nuclei are very small and contain nearly all of the gold atom’s mass. This is
particularly indicated by the alpha particles that scatter to very large angles, much like a soccer ball bouncing off a goalie’s head.
Alpha particles were known to be the doubly charged positive nuclei of helium atoms that had kinetic energies on
the order of when emitted in nuclear decay, which is the disintegration of the nucleus of an unstable nuclide
by the spontaneous emission of charged particles. These particles interact with matter mostly via the Coulomb
force, and the manner in which they scatter from nuclei can reveal nuclear size and mass. This is analogous to
observing how a bowling ball is scattered by an object you cannot see directly. Because the alpha particle’s energy is
so large compared with the typical energies associated with atoms ( versus ), you would expect the alpha
particles to simply crash through a thin foil much like a supersonic bowling ball would crash through a few dozen
rows of bowling pins. Thomson had envisioned the atom to be a small sphere in which equal amounts of positive
and negative charge were distributed evenly. The incident massive alpha particles would suffer only small
deflections in such a model. Instead, Rutherford and his collaborators found that alpha particles occasionally were
scattered to large angles, some even back in the direction from which they came! Detailed analysis using
conservation of momentum and energy—particularly of the small number that came straight back—implied that gold
nuclei are very small compared with the size of a gold atom, contain almost all of the atom’s mass, and are tightly
bound. Since the gold nucleus is several times more massive than the alpha particle, a head-on collision would
scatter the alpha particle straight back toward the source. In addition, the smaller the nucleus, the fewer alpha
particles that would hit one head on.
Although the results of the experiment were published by his colleagues in 1909, it took Rutherford two years to
convince himself of their meaning. Like Thomson before him, Rutherford was reluctant to accept such radical
PAGE: 1346
1328 30 • Atomic Physics
results. Nature on a small scale is so unlike our classical world that even those at the forefront of discovery are
sometimes surprised. Rutherford later wrote: “It was almost as incredible as if you fired a 15-inch shell at a piece of
tissue paper and it came back and hit you. On consideration, I realized that this scattering backwards ... [meant] ...
the greatest part of the mass of the atom was concentrated in a tiny nucleus.” In 1911, Rutherford published his
analysis together with a proposed model of the atom. The size of the nucleus was determined to be about ,
or 100,000 times smaller than the atom. This implies a huge density, on the order of , vastly unlike any
macroscopic matter. Also implied is the existence of previously unknown nuclear forces to counteract the huge
repulsive Coulomb forces among the positive charges in the nucleus. Huge forces would also be consistent with the
large energies emitted in nuclear radiation.
The small size of the nucleus also implies that the atom is mostly empty inside. In fact, in Rutherford’s experiment,
most alphas went straight through the gold foil with very little scattering, since electrons have such small masses
and since the atom was mostly empty with nothing for the alpha to hit. There were already hints of this at the time
Rutherford performed his experiments, since energetic electrons had been observed to penetrate thin foils more
easily than expected.Figure 30.11shows a schematic of the atoms in a thin foil with circles representing the size of
the atoms (about ) and dots representing the nuclei. (The dots are not to scale—if they were, you would
need a microscope to see them.) Most alpha particles miss the small nuclei and are only slightly scattered by
electrons. Occasionally, (about once in 8000 times in Rutherford’s experiment), an alpha hits a nucleus head-on and
is scattered straight backward.
FIGURE30.11An expanded view of the atoms in the gold foil in Rutherford’s experiment. Circles represent the atoms (about in
diameter), while the dots represent the nuclei (about in diameter). To be visible, the dots are much larger than scale. Most alpha
particles crash through but are relatively unaffected because of their high energy and the electron’s small mass. Some, however, head
straight toward a nucleus and are scattered straight back. A detailed analysis gives the size and mass of the nucleus.
Based on the size and mass of the nucleus revealed by his experiment, as well as the mass of electrons, Rutherford
proposed theplanetary model of the atom. The planetary model of the atom pictures low-mass electrons orbiting a
large-mass nucleus. The sizes of the electron orbits are large compared with the size of the nucleus, with mostly
vacuum inside the atom. This picture is analogous to how low-mass planets in our solar system orbit the large-mass
Sun at distances large compared with the size of the sun. In the atom, the attractive Coulomb force is analogous to
gravitation in the planetary system. (SeeFigure 30.12.) Note that a model or mental picture is needed to explain
experimental results, since the atom is too small to be directly observed with visible light.
FIGURE30.12Rutherford’s planetary model of the atom incorporates the characteristics of the nucleus, electrons, and the size of the
atom. This model was the first to recognize the structure of atoms, in which low-mass electrons orbit a very small, massive nucleus in orbits
much larger than the nucleus. The atom is mostly empty and is analogous to our planetary system.
Rutherford’s planetary model of the atom was crucial to understanding the characteristics of atoms, and their
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1347
30.3 • Bohr’s Theory of the Hydrogen Atom 1329
interactions and energies, as we shall see in the next few sections. Also, it was an indication of how different nature
is from the familiar classical world on the small, quantum mechanical scale. The discovery of a substructure to all
matter in the form of atoms and molecules was now being taken a step further to reveal a substructure of atoms
that was simpler than the 92 elements then known. We have continued to search for deeper substructures, such as
those inside the nucleus, with some success. In later chapters, we will follow this quest in the discussion of quarks
and other elementary particles, and we will look at the direction the search seems now to be heading.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Rutherford Scattering
How did Rutherford figure out the structure of the atom without being able to see it? Simulate the famous
experiment in which he disproved the Plum Pudding model of the atom by observing alpha particles bouncing off
atoms and determining that they must have a small core.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/books/college-physics-2e/pages/30-2-discovery-of-the-parts-of-the-
atom-electrons-and-nuclei)
30.3 Bohr’s Theory of the Hydrogen Atom
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Describe the mysteries of atomic spectra.
• Explain Bohr’s theory of the hydrogen atom.
• Explain Bohr’s planetary model of the atom.
• Illustrate energy state using the energy-level diagram.
• Describe the triumphs and limits of Bohr’s theory.
The great Danish physicist Niels Bohr (1885–1962) made immediate use of Rutherford’s planetary model of the
atom. (Figure 30.13). Bohr became convinced of its validity and spent part of 1912 at Rutherford’s laboratory. In
1913, after returning to Copenhagen, he began publishing his theory of the simplest atom, hydrogen, based on the
planetary model of the atom. For decades, many questions had been asked about atomic characteristics. From their
sizes to their spectra, much was known about atoms, but little had been explained in terms of the laws of physics.
Bohr’s theory explained the atomic spectrum of hydrogen and established new and broadly applicable principles in
quantum mechanics.
FIGURE30.13Niels Bohr, Danish physicist, used the planetary model of the atom to explain the atomic spectrum and size of the hydrogen
atom. His many contributions to the development of atomic physics and quantum mechanics, his personal influence on many students and
colleagues, and his personal integrity, especially in the face of Nazi oppression, earned him a prominent place in history. (credit: Unknown
Author, via Wikimedia Commons)
Mysteries of Atomic Spectra
As noted inQuantization of Energy, the energies of some small systems are quantized. Atomic and molecular
PAGE: 1348
1330 30 • Atomic Physics
emission and absorption spectra have been known for over a century to be discrete (or quantized). (SeeFigure
30.14.) Maxwell and others had realized that there must be a connection between the spectrum of an atom and its
structure, something like the resonant frequencies of musical instruments. But, in spite of years of efforts by many
great minds, no one had a workable theory. (It was a running joke that any theory of atomic and molecular spectra
could be destroyed by throwing a book of data at it, so complex were the spectra.) Following Einstein’s proposal of
photons with quantized energies directly proportional to their wavelengths, it became even more evident that
electrons in atoms can exist only in discrete orbits.
FIGURE30.14Part (a) shows, from left to right, a discharge tube, slit, and diffraction grating producing a line spectrum. Part (b) shows the
emission line spectrum for iron. The discrete lines imply quantized energy states for the atoms that produce them. The line spectrum for
each element is unique, providing a powerful and much used analytical tool, and many line spectra were well known for many years before
they could be explained with physics. (credit for (b): Yttrium91, Wikimedia Commons)
In some cases, it had been possible to devise formulas that described the emission spectra. As you might expect,
the simplest atom—hydrogen, with its single electron—has a relatively simple spectrum. The hydrogen spectrum had
been observed in the infrared (IR), visible, and ultraviolet (UV), and several series of spectral lines had been
observed. (SeeFigure 30.15.) These series are named after early researchers who studied them in particular depth.
The observedhydrogen-spectrum wavelengthscan be calculated using the following formula:
30.13
where is the wavelength of the emitted EM radiation and is theRydberg constant, determined by the
experiment to be
30.14
The constant is a positive integer associated with a specific series. For the Lyman series, ; for the Balmer
series, ; for the Paschen series, ; and so on. The Lyman series is entirely in the UV, while part of the
Balmer series is visible with the remainder UV. The Paschen series and all the rest are entirely IR. There are
apparently an unlimited number of series, although they lie progressively farther into the infrared and become
difficult to observe as increases. The constant is a positive integer, but it must be greater than . Thus, for the
Balmer series, and . Note that can approach infinity. While the formula in the
wavelengths equation was just a recipe designed to fit data and was not based on physical principles, it did imply a
deeper meaning. Balmer first devised the formula for his series alone, and it was later found to describe all the other
series by using different values of . Bohr was the first to comprehend the deeper meaning. Again, we see the
interplay between experiment and theory in physics. Experimentally, the spectra were well established, an equation
was found to fit the experimental data, but the theoretical foundation was missing.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1349
30.3 • Bohr’s Theory of the Hydrogen Atom 1331
FIGURE30.15A schematic of the hydrogen spectrum shows several series named for those who contributed most to their determination.
Part of the Balmer series is in the visible spectrum, while the Lyman series is entirely in the UV, and the Paschen series and others are in the
IR. Values of and are shown for some of the lines.
EXAMPLE 30.1
Calculating Wave Interference of a Hydrogen Line
What is the distance between the slits of a grating that produces a first-order maximum for the second Balmer line
at an angle of ?
Strategy and Concept
For an Integrated Concept problem, we must first identify the physical principles involved. In this example, we need
to know (a) the wavelength of light as well as (b) conditions for an interference maximum for the pattern from a
double slit. Part (a) deals with a topic of the present chapter, while part (b) considers the wave interference material
ofWave Optics.
Solution for (a)
Hydrogen spectrum wavelength. The Balmer series requires that . The first line in the series is taken to be
for , and so the second would have .
The calculation is a straightforward application of the wavelength equation. Entering the determined values for
and yields
30.15
Inverting to find gives
30.16
Discussion for (a)
This is indeed the experimentally observed wavelength, corresponding to the second (blue-green) line in the Balmer
series. More impressive is the fact that the same simple recipe predictsallof the hydrogen spectrum lines, including
new ones observed in subsequent experiments. What is nature telling us?
Solution for (b)
Double-slit interference(Wave Optics). To obtain constructive interference for a double slit, the path length
difference from two slits must be an integral multiple of the wavelength. This condition was expressed by the
equation
30.17
PAGE: 1350
1332 30 • Atomic Physics
where is the distance between slits and is the angle from the original direction of the beam. The number is the
order of the interference; in this example. Solving for and entering known values yields
30.18
Discussion for (b)
This number is similar to those used in the interference examples ofIntroduction to Quantum Physics(and is close
to the spacing between slits in commonly used diffraction glasses).
Bohr’s Solution for Hydrogen
Bohr was able to derive the formula for the hydrogen spectrum using basic physics, the planetary model of the
atom, and some very important new proposals. His first proposal is that only certain orbits are allowed: we say that
the orbits of electrons in atoms are quantized. Each orbit has a different energy, and electrons can move to a higher
orbit by absorbing energy and drop to a lower orbit by emitting energy. If the orbits are quantized, the amount of
energy absorbed or emitted is also quantized, producing discrete spectra. Photon absorption and emission are
among the primary methods of transferring energy into and out of atoms. The energies of the photons are quantized,
and their energy is explained as being equal to the change in energy of the electron when it moves from one orbit to
another. In equation form, this is
30.19
Here, is the change in energy between the initial and final orbits, and is the energy of the absorbed or
emitted photon. It is quite logical (that is, expected from our everyday experience) that energy is involved in
changing orbits. A blast of energy is required for the space shuttle, for example, to climb to a higher orbit. What is
not expected is that atomic orbits should be quantized. This is not observed for satellites or planets, which can have
any orbit given the proper energy. (SeeFigure 30.16.)
FIGURE30.16The planetary model of the atom, as modified by Bohr, has the orbits of the electrons quantized. Only certain orbits are
allowed, explaining why atomic spectra are discrete (quantized). The energy carried away from an atom by a photon comes from the
electron dropping from one allowed orbit to another and is thus quantized. This is likewise true for atomic absorption of photons.
Figure 30.17shows anenergy-level diagram, a convenient way to display energy states. In the present discussion,
we take these to be the allowed energy levels of the electron. Energy is plotted vertically with the lowest or ground
state at the bottom and with excited states above. Given the energies of the lines in an atomic spectrum, it is
possible (although sometimes very difficult) to determine the energy levels of an atom. Energy-level diagrams are
used for many systems, including molecules and nuclei. A theory of the atom or any other system must predict its
energies based on the physics of the system.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1351
30.3 • Bohr’s Theory of the Hydrogen Atom 1333
FIGURE30.17An energy-level diagram plots energy vertically and is useful in visualizing the energy states of a system and the transitions
between them. This diagram is for the hydrogen-atom electrons, showing a transition between two orbits having energies and .
Bohr was clever enough to find a way to calculate the electron orbital energies in hydrogen. This was an important
first step that has been improved upon, but it is well worth repeating here, because it does correctly describe many
characteristics of hydrogen. Assuming circular orbits, Bohr proposed that theangular momentum of an electron
in its orbit is quantized, that is, it has only specific, discrete values. The value for is given by the formula
30.20
where is the angular momentum, is the electron’s mass, is the radius of the th orbit, and is Planck’s
constant. Note that angular momentum is . For a small object at a radius and , so that
. Quantization says that this value of can only be equal to , etc. At the
time, Bohr himself did not know why angular momentum should be quantized, but using this assumption he was
able to calculate the energies in the hydrogen spectrum, something no one else had done at the time.
From Bohr’s assumptions, we will now derive a number of important properties of the hydrogen atom from the
classical physics we have covered in the text. We start by noting the centripetal force causing the electron to follow
a circular path is supplied by the Coulomb force. To be more general, we note that this analysis is valid for any
single-electron atom. So, if a nucleus has protons ( for hydrogen, 2 for helium, etc.) and only one electron,
that atom is called ahydrogen-like atom. The spectra of hydrogen-like ions are similar to hydrogen, but shifted to
higher energy by the greater attractive force between the electron and nucleus. The magnitude of the centripetal
force is , while the Coulomb force is . The tacit assumption here is that the nucleus is more
massive than the stationary electron, and the electron orbits about it. This is consistent with the planetary model of
the atom. Equating these,
30.21
Angular momentum quantization is stated in an earlier equation. We solve that equation for , substitute it into the
above, and rearrange the expression to obtain the radius of the orbit. This yields:
30.22
where is defined to be theBohr radius, since for the lowest orbit and for hydrogen , . It
is left for this chapter’s Problems and Exercises to show that the Bohr radius is
PAGE: 1352
1334 30 • Atomic Physics
30.23
These last two equations can be used to calculate theradii of the allowed (quantized) electron orbits in any
hydrogen-like atom. It is impressive that the formula gives the correct size of hydrogen, which is measured
experimentally to be very close to the Bohr radius. The earlier equation also tells us that the orbital radius is
proportional to , as illustrated inFigure 30.18.
FIGURE30.18The allowed electron orbits in hydrogen have the radii shown. These radii were first calculated by Bohr and are given by the
equation . The lowest orbit has the experimentally verified diameter of a hydrogen atom.
To get the electron orbital energies, we start by noting that the electron energy is the sum of its kinetic and potential
energy:
30.24
Kinetic energy is the familiar , assuming the electron is not moving at relativistic speeds. Potential
energy for the electron is electrical, or , where is the potential due to the nucleus, which looks like a
point charge. The nucleus has a positive charge ; thus, , recalling an earlier equation for the
potential due to a point charge. Since the electron’s charge is negative, we see that . Entering the
expressions for and , we find
30.25
Now we substitute and from earlier equations into the above expression for energy. Algebraic manipulation
yields
30.26
for the orbitalenergies of hydrogen-like atoms. Here, is theground-state energy for hydrogen
and is given by
30.27
Thus, for hydrogen,
30.28
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1353
30.3 • Bohr’s Theory of the Hydrogen Atom 1335
Figure 30.19shows an energy-level diagram for hydrogen that also illustrates how the various spectral series for
hydrogen are related to transitions between energy levels.
FIGURE30.19Energy-level diagram for hydrogen showing the Lyman, Balmer, and Paschen series of transitions. The orbital energies are
calculated using the above equation, first derived by Bohr.
Electron total energies are negative, since the electron is bound to the nucleus, analogous to being in a hole without
enough kinetic energy to escape. As approaches infinity, the total energy becomes zero. This corresponds to a free
electron with no kinetic energy, since gets very large for large , and the electric potential energy thus becomes
zero. Thus, 13.6 eV is needed to ionize hydrogen (to go from –13.6 eV to 0, or unbound), an experimentally verified
number. Given more energy, the electron becomes unbound with some kinetic energy. For example, giving 15.0 eV
to an electron in the ground state of hydrogen strips it from the atom and leaves it with 1.4 eV of kinetic energy.
Finally, let us consider the energy of a photon emitted in a downward transition, given by the equation to be
30.29
Substituting , we see that
30.30
Dividing both sides of this equation by gives an expression for :
30.31
It can be shown that
30.32
PAGE: 1354
1336 30 • Atomic Physics
is theRydberg constant. Thus, we have used Bohr’s assumptions to derive the formula first proposed by Balmer
years earlier as a recipe to fit experimental data.
30.33
We see that Bohr’s theory of the hydrogen atom answers the question as to why this previously known formula
describes the hydrogen spectrum. It is because the energy levels are proportional to , where is a non-negative
integer. A downward transition releases energy, and so must be greater than . The various series are those
where the transitions end on a certain level. For the Lyman series, — that is, all the transitions end in the
ground state (see alsoFigure 30.19). For the Balmer series, , or all the transitions end in the first excited
state; and so on. What was once a recipe is now based in physics, and something new is emerging—angular
momentum is quantized.
Triumphs and Limits of the Bohr Theory
Bohr did what no one had been able to do before. Not only did he explain the spectrum of hydrogen, he correctly
calculated the size of the atom from basic physics. Some of his ideas are broadly applicable. Electron orbital
energies are quantized in all atoms and molecules. Angular momentum is quantized. The electrons do not spiral into
the nucleus, as expected classically (accelerated charges radiate, so that the electron orbits classically would decay
quickly, and the electrons would sit on the nucleus—matter would collapse). These are major triumphs.
But there are limits to Bohr’s theory. It cannot be applied to multielectron atoms, even one as simple as a two-
electron helium atom. Bohr’s model is what we callsemiclassical. The orbits are quantized (nonclassical) but are
assumed to be simple circular paths (classical). As quantum mechanics was developed, it became clear that there
are no well-defined orbits; rather, there are clouds of probability. Bohr’s theory also did not explain that some
spectral lines are doublets (split into two) when examined closely. We shall examine many of these aspects of
quantum mechanics in more detail, but it should be kept in mind that Bohr did not fail. Rather, he made very
important steps along the path to greater knowledge and laid the foundation for all of atomic physics that has since
evolved.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Models of the Hydrogen Atom
How did scientists figure out the structure of atoms without looking at them? Try out different models by shooting
light at the atom. Check how the prediction of the model matches the experimental results.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/l/28atom_model).
30.4 X Rays: Atomic Origins and Applications
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define x-ray tube and its spectrum.
• Show the x-ray characteristic energy.
• Specify the use of x rays in medical observations.
• Explain the use of x rays in CT scanners in diagnostics.
Each type of atom (or element) has its own characteristic electromagnetic spectrum.X rayslie at the high-
frequency end of an atom’s spectrum and are characteristic of the atom as well. In this section, we explore
characteristic x rays and some of their important applications.
We have previously discussed x rays as a part of the electromagnetic spectrum inPhoton Energies and the
Electromagnetic Spectrum. That module illustrated how an x-ray tube (a specialized CRT) produces x rays. Electrons
emitted from a hot filament are accelerated with a high voltage, gaining significant kinetic energy and striking the
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1355
30.4 • X Rays: Atomic Origins and Applications 1337
anode.
There are two processes by which x rays are produced in the anode of an x-ray tube. In one process, the
deceleration of electrons produces x rays, and these x rays are calledbremsstrahlung, or braking radiation. The
second process is atomic in nature and producescharacteristic x rays, so called because they are characteristic of
the anode material. The x-ray spectrum inFigure 30.20is typical of what is produced by an x-ray tube, showing a
broad curve of bremsstrahlung radiation with characteristic x-ray peaks on it.
FIGURE30.20X-ray spectrum obtained when energetic electrons strike a material, such as in the anode of a CRT. The smooth part of the
spectrum is bremsstrahlung radiation, while the peaks are characteristic of the anode material. A different anode material would have
characteristic x-ray peaks at different frequencies.
The spectrum inFigure 30.20is collected over a period of time in which many electrons strike the anode, with a
variety of possible outcomes for each hit. The broad range of x-ray energies in the bremsstrahlung radiation
indicates that an incident electron’s energy is not usually converted entirely into photon energy. The highest-energy
x ray produced is one for which all of the electron’s energy was converted to photon energy. Thus the accelerating
voltage and the maximum x-ray energy are related by conservation of energy. Electric potential energy is converted
to kinetic energy and then to photon energy, so that Units of electron volts are convenient.
For example, a 100-kV accelerating voltage produces x-ray photons with a maximum energy of 100 keV.
Some electrons excite atoms in the anode. Part of the energy that they deposit by collision with an atom results in
one or more of the atom’s inner electrons being knocked into a higher orbit or the atom being ionized. When the
anode’s atoms de-excite, they emit characteristic electromagnetic radiation. The most energetic of these are
produced when an inner-shell vacancy is filled—that is, when an or shell electron has been excited to a
higher level, and another electron falls into the vacant spot. Acharacteristic x ray(seePhoton Energies and the
Electromagnetic Spectrum) is electromagnetic (EM) radiation emitted by an atom when an inner-shell vacancy is
filled.Figure 30.21shows a representative energy-level diagram that illustrates the labeling of characteristic x rays.
X rays created when an electron falls into an shell vacancy are called when they come from the next
higher level; that is, an to transition. The labels come from the older alphabetical labeling of
shells starting with rather than using the principal quantum numbers 1, 2, 3, …. A more energetic x ray is
produced when an electron falls into an shell vacancy from the shell; that is, an to
transition. Similarly, when an electron falls into the shell from the shell, an x ray is created. The
energies of these x rays depend on the energies of electron states in the particular atom and, thus, are characteristic
of that element: every element has it own set of x-ray energies. This property can be used to identify elements, for
example, to find trace (small) amounts of an element in an environmental or biological sample.
PAGE: 1356
1338 30 • Atomic Physics
FIGURE30.21A characteristic x ray is emitted when an electron fills an inner-shell vacancy, as shown for several transitions in this
approximate energy level diagram for a multiple-electron atom. Characteristic x rays are labeled according to the shell that had the vacancy
and the shell from which the electron came. A x ray, for example, is produced when an electron coming from the shell fills the
shell vacancy.
EXAMPLE 30.2
Characteristic X-Ray Energy
Calculate the approximate energy of a x ray from a tungsten anode in an x-ray tube.
Strategy
How do we calculate energies in a multiple-electron atom? In the case of characteristic x rays, the following
approximate calculation is reasonable. Characteristic x rays are produced when an inner-shell vacancy is filled.
Inner-shell electrons are nearer the nucleus than others in an atom and thus feel little net effect from the others.
This is similar to what happens inside a charged conductor, where its excess charge is distributed over the surface
so that it produces no electric field inside. It is reasonable to assume the inner-shell electrons have hydrogen-like
energies, as given by . As noted, a x ray is produced by an to
transition. Since there are two electrons in a filled shell, a vacancy would leave one electron, so that the effective
charge would be rather than .For tungsten, , so that the effective charge is 73.
Solution
gives the orbital energies for hydrogen-like atoms to be where
,
. As noted, the effective is 73. Now the x-ray energy is given by
30.34
where
30.35
and
30.36
Thus,
30.37
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1357
30.4 • X Rays: Atomic Origins and Applications 1339
Discussion
This large photon energy is typical of characteristic x rays from heavy elements. It is large compared with other
atomic emissions because it is produced when an inner-shell vacancy is filled, and inner-shell electrons are tightly
bound. Characteristic x ray energies become progressively larger for heavier elements because their energy
increases approximately as . Significant accelerating voltage is needed to create these inner-shell vacancies. In
the case of tungsten, at least 72.5 kV is needed, because other shells are filled and you cannot simply bump one
electron to a higher filled shell. Tungsten is a common anode material in x-ray tubes; so much of the energy of the
impinging electrons is absorbed, raising its temperature, that a high-melting-point material like tungsten is required.
Medical and Other Diagnostic Uses of X-rays
All of us can identify diagnostic uses of x-ray photons. Among these are the universal dental and medical x rays that
have become an essential part of medical diagnostics. (SeeFigure 30.23andFigure 30.24.) X rays are also used to
inspect our luggage at airports, as shown inFigure 30.22, and for early detection of cracks in crucial aircraft
components. An x ray is not only a noun meaning high-energy photon, it also is an image produced by x rays, and it
has been made into a familiar verb—to be x-rayed.
FIGURE30.22An x-ray image reveals fillings in a person’s teeth. (credit: Dmitry G, Wikimedia Commons)
FIGURE30.23This x-ray image of a person’s chest shows many details, including an artificial pacemaker. (credit: Sunzi99, Wikimedia
Commons)
FIGURE30.24This x-ray image shows the contents of a piece of luggage. The denser the material, the darker the shadow. (credit: IDuke,
Wikimedia Commons)
The most common x-ray images are simple shadows. Since x-ray photons have high energies, they penetrate
materials that are opaque to visible light. The more energy an x-ray photon has, the more material it will penetrate.
So an x-ray tube may be operated at 50.0 kV for a chest x ray, whereas it may need to be operated at 100 kV to
PAGE: 1358
1340 30 • Atomic Physics
examine a broken leg in a cast. The depth of penetration is related to the density of the material as well as to the
energy of the photon. The denser the material, the fewer x-ray photons get through and the darker the shadow. Thus
x rays excel at detecting breaks in bones and in imaging other physiological structures, such as some tumors, that
differ in density from surrounding material. Because of their high photon energy, x rays produce significant
ionization in materials and damage cells in biological organisms. Modern uses minimize exposure to the patient and
eliminate exposure to others. Biological effects of x rays will be explored in the next chapter along with other types
of ionizing radiation such as those produced by nuclei.
As the x-ray energy increases, the Compton effect (seePhoton Momentum) becomes more important in the
attenuation of the x rays. Here, the x ray scatters from an outer electron shell of the atom, giving the ejected
electron some kinetic energy while losing energy itself. The probability for attenuation of the x rays depends upon
the number of electrons present (the material’s density) as well as the thickness of the material. Chemical
composition of the medium, as characterized by its atomic number , is not important here. Low-energy x rays
provide better contrast (sharper images). However, due to greater attenuation and less scattering, they are more
absorbed by thicker materials. Greater contrast can be achieved by injecting a substance with a large atomic
number, such as barium or iodine. The structure of the part of the body that contains the substance (e.g., the gastro-
intestinal tract or the abdomen) can easily be seen this way.
Breast cancer is the second-leading cause of death among women worldwide. Early detection can be very effective,
hence the importance of x-ray diagnostics. A mammogram cannot diagnose a malignant tumor, only give evidence of
a lump or region of increased density within the breast. X-ray absorption by different types of soft tissue is very
similar, so contrast is difficult; this is especially true for younger women, who typically have denser breasts. For
older women who are at greater risk of developing breast cancer, the presence of more fat in the breast gives the
lump or tumor more contrast. MRI (Magnetic resonance imaging) has recently been used as a supplement to
conventional x rays to improve detection and eliminate false positives. The subject’s radiation dose from x rays will
be treated in a later chapter.
A standard x ray gives only a two-dimensional view of the object. Dense bones might hide images of soft tissue or
organs. If you took another x ray from the side of the person (the first one being from the front), you would gain
additional information. While shadow images are sufficient in many applications, far more sophisticated images can
be produced with modern technology.Figure 30.25shows the use of a computed tomography (CT) scanner, also
called computed axial tomography (CAT) scanner. X rays are passed through a narrow section (called a slice) of the
patient’s body (or body part) over a range of directions. An array of many detectors on the other side of the patient
registers the x rays. The system is then rotated around the patient and another image is taken, and so on. The x-ray
tube and detector array are mechanically attached and so rotate together. Complex computer image processing of
the relative absorption of the x rays along different directions produces a highly-detailed image. Different slices are
taken as the patient moves through the scanner on a table. Multiple images of different slices can also be computer
analyzed to produce three-dimensional information, sometimes enhancing specific types of tissue, as shown in
Figure 30.26. G. Hounsfield (UK) and A. Cormack (US) won the Nobel Prize in Medicine in 1979 for their
development of computed tomography.
FIGURE30.25A patient being positioned in a CT scanner aboard the hospital ship USNS Mercy. The CT scanner passes x rays through
slices of the patient’s body (or body part) over a range of directions. The relative absorption of the x rays along different directions is
computer analyzed to produce highly detailed images. Three-dimensional information can be obtained from multiple slices. (credit:
Rebecca Moat, U.S. Navy)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1359
30.4 • X Rays: Atomic Origins and Applications 1341
FIGURE30.26This three-dimensional image of a skull was produced by computed tomography, involving analysis of several x-ray slices of
the head. (credit: Emailshankar, Wikimedia Commons)
X-Ray Diffraction and Crystallography
Since x-ray photons are very energetic, they have relatively short wavelengths. For example, the 54.4-keV x ray
ofExample 30.2has a wavelength . Thus, typical x-ray photons act like rays when they
encounter macroscopic objects, like teeth, and produce sharp shadows; however, since atoms are on the order of
0.1 nm in size, x rays can be used to detect the location, shape, and size of atoms and molecules. The process is
calledx-ray diffraction, because it involves the diffraction and interference of x rays to produce patterns that can be
analyzed for information about the structures that scattered the x rays. Perhaps the most famous example of x-ray
diffraction is the discovery of the double-helix structure of DNA in 1953 by an international team of scientists
working at the Cavendish Laboratory—American James Watson, Englishman Francis Crick, and New Zealand–born
Maurice Wilkins. Using x-ray diffraction data produced by Rosalind Franklin, they were the first to discern the
structure of DNA that is so crucial to life. For this, Watson, Crick, and Wilkins were awarded the 1962 Nobel Prize in
Physiology or Medicine. There is much debate and controversy over the issue that Rosalind Franklin was not
included in the prize.
Figure 30.27shows a diffraction pattern produced by the scattering of x rays from a crystal. This process is known
as x-ray crystallography because of the information it can yield about crystal structure, and it was the type of data
Rosalind Franklin supplied to Watson and Crick for DNA. Not only do x rays confirm the size and shape of atoms,
they give information on the atomic arrangements in materials. For example, current research in high-temperature
superconductors involves complex materials whose lattice arrangements are crucial to obtaining a superconducting
material. These can be studied using x-ray crystallography.
FIGURE30.27X-ray diffraction from the crystal of a protein, hen egg lysozyme, produced this interference pattern. Analysis of the pattern
yields information about the structure of the protein. (credit: Del45, Wikimedia Commons)
Historically, the scattering of x rays from crystals was used to prove that x rays are energetic EM waves. This was
suspected from the time of the discovery of x rays in 1895, but it was not until 1912 that the German Max von Laue
(1879–1960) convinced two of his colleagues to scatter x rays from crystals. If a diffraction pattern is obtained, he
reasoned, then the x rays must be waves, and their wavelength could be determined. (The spacing of atoms in
various crystals was reasonably well known at the time, based on good values for Avogadro’s number.) The
PAGE: 1360
1342 30 • Atomic Physics
experiments were convincing, and the 1914 Nobel Prize in Physics was given to von Laue for his suggestion leading
to the proof that x rays are EM waves. In 1915, the unique father-and-son team of Sir William Henry Bragg and his
son Sir William Lawrence Bragg were awarded a joint Nobel Prize for inventing the x-ray spectrometer and the then-
new science of x-ray analysis. The elder Bragg had migrated to Australia from England just after graduating in
mathematics. He learned physics and chemistry during his career at the University of Adelaide. The younger Bragg
was born in Adelaide but went back to the Cavendish Laboratories in England to a career in x-ray and neutron
crystallography; he provided support for Watson, Crick, and Wilkins for their work on unraveling the mysteries of
DNA and to Max Perutz for his 1962 Nobel Prize-winning work on the structure of hemoglobin. Here again, we
witness the enabling nature of physics—establishing instruments and designing experiments as well as solving
mysteries in the biomedical sciences.
Certain other uses for x rays will be studied in later chapters. X rays are useful in the treatment of cancer because of
the inhibiting effect they have on cell reproduction. X rays observed coming from outer space are useful in
determining the nature of their sources, such as neutron stars and possibly black holes. Created in nuclear bomb
explosions, x rays can also be used to detect clandestine atmospheric tests of these weapons. X rays can cause
excitations of atoms, which then fluoresce (emitting characteristic EM radiation), making x-ray-induced fluorescence
a valuable analytical tool in a range of fields from art to archaeology.
30.5 Applications of Atomic Excitations and De-Excitations
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define and discuss fluorescence.
• Define metastable.
• Describe how laser emission is produced.
• Explain population inversion.
• Define and discuss holography.
Many properties of matter and phenomena in nature are directly related to atomic energy levels and their associated
excitations and de-excitations. The color of a rose, the output of a laser, and the transparency of air are but a few
examples. (SeeFigure 30.28.) While it may not appear that glow-in-the-dark pajamas and lasers have much in
common, they are in fact different applications of similar atomic de-excitations.
FIGURE30.28Light from a laser is based on a particular type of atomic de-excitation. (credit: Jeff Keyzer)
The color of a material is due to the ability of its atoms to absorb certain wavelengths while reflecting or reemitting
others. A simple red material, for example a tomato, absorbs all visible wavelengths except red. This is because the
atoms of its hydrocarbon pigment (lycopene) have levels separated by a variety of energies corresponding to all
visible photon energies except red. Air is another interesting example. It is transparent to visible light, because there
are few energy levels that visible photons can excite in air molecules and atoms. Visible light, thus, cannot be
absorbed. Furthermore, visible light is only weakly scattered by air, because visible wavelengths are so much greater
than the sizes of the air molecules and atoms. Light must pass through kilometers of air to scatter enough to cause
red sunsets and blue skies.
Fluorescence and Phosphorescence
The ability of a material to emit various wavelengths of light is similarly related to its atomic energy levels.Figure
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1361
30.5 • Applications of Atomic Excitations and De-Excitations 1343
30.29shows a scorpion illuminated by a UV lamp, sometimes called a black light. Some rocks also glow in black
light, the particular colors being a function of the rock’s mineral composition. Black lights are also used to make
certain posters glow.
FIGURE30.29Objects glow in the visible spectrum when illuminated by an ultraviolet (black) light. Emissions are characteristic of the
mineral involved, since they are related to its energy levels. In the case of scorpions, proteins near the surface of their skin give off the
characteristic blue glow. This is a colorful example of fluorescence in which excitation is induced by UV radiation while de-excitation occurs
in the form of visible light. (credit: Ken Bosma, Flickr)
In the fluorescence process, an atom is excited to a level several steps above its ground state by the absorption of a
relatively high-energy UV photon. This is calledatomic excitation. Once it is excited, the atom can de-excite in
several ways, one of which is to re-emit a photon of the same energy as excited it, a single step back to the ground
state. This is calledatomic de-excitation. All other paths of de-excitation involve smaller steps, in which lower-
energy (longer wavelength) photons are emitted. Some of these may be in the visible range, such as for the scorpion
inFigure 30.29.Fluorescenceis defined to be any process in which an atom or molecule, excited by a photon of a
given energy, and de-excites by emission of a lower-energy photon.
Fluorescence can be induced by many types of energy input. Fluorescent paint, dyes, and even soap residues in
clothes make colors seem brighter in sunlight by converting some UV into visible light. X rays can induce
fluorescence, as is done in x-ray fluoroscopy to make brighter visible images. Electric discharges can induce
fluorescence, as in so-called neon lights and in gas-discharge tubes that produce atomic and molecular spectra.
Common fluorescent lights use an electric discharge in mercury vapor to cause atomic emissions from mercury
atoms. The inside of a fluorescent light is coated with a fluorescent material that emits visible light over a broad
spectrum of wavelengths. By choosing an appropriate coating, fluorescent lights can be made more like sunlight or
like the reddish glow of candlelight, depending on needs. Fluorescent lights are more efficient in converting
electrical energy into visible light than incandescent filaments (about four times as efficient), the blackbody
radiation of which is primarily in the infrared due to temperature limitations.
This atom is excited to one of its higher levels by absorbing a UV photon. It can de-excite in a single step, re-emitting
a photon of the same energy, or in several steps. The process is called fluorescence if the atom de-excites in smaller
steps, emitting energy different from that which excited it. Fluorescence can be induced by a variety of energy
inputs, such as UV, x-rays, and electrical discharge.
The spectacular Waitomo caves on North Island in New Zealand provide a natural habitat for glow-worms. The
glow-worms hang up to 70 silk threads of about 30 or 40 cm each to trap prey that fly towards them in the dark. The
fluorescence process is very efficient, with nearly 100% of the energy input turning into light. (In comparison,
fluorescent lights are about 20% efficient.)
Fluorescence has many uses in biology and medicine. It is commonly used to label and follow a molecule within a
cell. Such tagging allows one to study the structure of DNA and proteins. Fluorescent dyes and antibodies are
usually used to tag the molecules, which are then illuminated with UV light and their emission of visible light is
observed. Since the fluorescence of each element is characteristic, identification of elements within a sample can
be done this way.
Figure 30.30shows a commonly used fluorescent dye called fluorescein. Below that,Figure 30.31reveals the
diffusion of a fluorescent dye in water by observing it under UV light.
PAGE: 1362
1344 30 • Atomic Physics
FIGURE30.30Fluorescein, shown here in powder form, is used to dye laboratory samples. (credit: Benjah-bmm27, Wikimedia Commons)
FIGURE30.31Here, fluorescent powder is added to a beaker of water. The mixture gives off a bright glow under ultraviolet light. (credit:
Bricksnite, Wikimedia Commons)
Nano-Crystals
Recently, a new class of fluorescent materials has appeared—“nano-crystals.” These are single-crystal
molecules less than 100 nm in size. The smallest of these are called “quantum dots.” These semiconductor
indicators are very small (2–6 nm) and provide improved brightness. They also have the advantage that all
colors can be excited with the same incident wavelength. They are brighter and more stable than organic dyes
and have a longer lifetime than conventional phosphors. They have become an excellent tool for long-term
studies of cells, including migration and morphology. (Figure 30.32.)
FIGURE30.32Microscopic image of chicken cells using nano-crystals of a fluorescent dye. Cell nuclei exhibit blue fluorescence while
neurofilaments exhibit green. (credit: Weerapong Prasongchean, Wikimedia Commons)
Once excited, an atom or molecule will usually spontaneously de-excite quickly. (The electrons raised to higher
levels are attracted to lower ones by the positive charge of the nucleus.) Spontaneous de-excitation has a very short
mean lifetime of typically about . However, some levels have significantly longer lifetimes, ranging up to
milliseconds to minutes or even hours. These energy levels are inhibited and are slow in de-exciting because their
quantum numbers differ greatly from those of available lower levels. Although these level lifetimes are short in
human terms, they are many orders of magnitude longer than is typical and, thus, are said to bemetastable,
meaning relatively stable.Phosphorescenceis the de-excitation of a metastable state. Glow-in-the-dark materials,
such as luminous dials on some watches and clocks and on children’s toys and pajamas, are made of
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1363
30.5 • Applications of Atomic Excitations and De-Excitations 1345
phosphorescent substances. Visible light excites the atoms or molecules to metastable states that decay slowly,
releasing the stored excitation energy partially as visible light. In some ceramics, atomic excitation energy can be
frozen in after the ceramic has cooled from its firing. It is very slowly released, but the ceramic can be induced to
phosphoresce by heating—a process called “thermoluminescence.” Since the release is slow, thermoluminescence
can be used to date antiquities. The less light emitted, the older the ceramic. (SeeFigure 30.33.)
FIGURE30.33Atoms frozen in an excited state when this Chinese ceramic figure was fired can be stimulated to de-excite and emit EM
radiation by heating a sample of the ceramic—a process called thermoluminescence. Since the states slowly de-excite over centuries, the
amount of thermoluminescence decreases with age, making it possible to use this effect to date and authenticate antiquities. This figure
dates from the 11thcentury. (credit: Vassil, Wikimedia Commons)
Lasers
Lasers today are commonplace. Lasers are used to read bar codes at stores and in libraries, laser shows are staged
for entertainment, laser printers produce high-quality images at relatively low cost, and lasers send prodigious
numbers of telephone messages through optical fibers. Among other things, lasers are also employed in surveying,
weapons guidance, tumor eradication, retinal welding, and for reading DVDs, Blu-rays, and computer or game
console CD-ROMs.
Why do lasers have so many varied applications? The answer is that lasers produce single-wavelength EM radiation
that is also very coherent—that is, the emitted photons are in phase. Laser output can, thus, be more precisely
manipulated than incoherent mixed-wavelength EM radiation from other sources. The reason laser output is so pure
and coherent is based on how it is produced, which in turn depends on a metastable state in the lasing material.
Suppose a material had the energy levels shown inFigure 30.34. When energy is put into a large collection of these
atoms, electrons are raised to all possible levels. Most return to the ground state in less than about , but
those in the metastable state linger. This includes those electrons originally excited to the metastable state and
those that fell into it from above. It is possible to get a majority of the atoms into the metastable state, a condition
called apopulation inversion.
PAGE: 1364
1346 30 • Atomic Physics
FIGURE30.34(a) Energy-level diagram for an atom showing the first few states, one of which is metastable. (b) Massive energy input
excites atoms to a variety of states. (c) Most states decay quickly, leaving electrons only in the metastable and ground state. If a majority of
electrons are in the metastable state, a population inversion has been achieved.
Once a population inversion is achieved, a very interesting thing can happen, as shown inFigure 30.35. An electron
spontaneously falls from the metastable state, emitting a photon. This photon finds another atom in the metastable
state and stimulates it to decay, emitting a second photon ofthe same wavelength and in phasewith the first, and so
on.Stimulated emissionis the emission of electromagnetic radiation in the form of photons of a given frequency,
triggered by photons of the same frequency. For example, an excited atom, with an electron in an energy orbit higher
than normal, releases a photon of a specific frequency when the electron drops back to a lower energy orbit. If this
photon then strikes another electron in the same high-energy orbit in another atom, another photon of the same
frequency is released. The emitted photons and the triggering photons are always in phase, have the same
polarization, and travel in the same direction. The probability of absorption of a photon is the same as the
probability of stimulated emission, and so a majority of atoms must be in the metastable state to produce energy.
Einstein (again Einstein, and back in 1917!) was one of the important contributors to the understanding of
stimulated emission of radiation. Decades before the technology was invented to even experiment with laser
generation, Einstein was the first to realize that stimulated emission and absorption are equally probable. The laser
acts as a temporary energy storage device that subsequently produces a massive energy output of single-
wavelength, in-phase photons.
FIGURE30.35One atom in the metastable state spontaneously decays to a lower level, producing a photon that goes on to stimulate
another atom to de-excite. The second photon has exactly the same energy and wavelength as the first and is in phase with it. Both go on to
stimulate the emission of other photons. A population inversion is necessary for there to be a net production rather than a net absorption of
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1365
30.5 • Applications of Atomic Excitations and De-Excitations 1347
the photons.
The namelaseris an acronym for light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation, the process just described.
The process was proposed and developed following the advances in quantum physics. A joint Nobel Prize was
awarded in 1964 to American Charles Townes (1915–), and Nikolay Basov (1922–2001) and Aleksandr Prokhorov
(1916–2002), from the Soviet Union, for the development of lasers. The Nobel Prize in 1981 went to Arthur
Schawlow (1921-1999) for pioneering laser applications. The original devices were called masers, because they
produced microwaves. The first working laser was created in 1960 at Hughes Research labs (CA) by T. Maiman. It
used a pulsed high-powered flash lamp and a ruby rod to produce red light. Today the name laser is used for all such
devices developed to produce a variety of wavelengths, including microwave, infrared, visible, and ultraviolet
radiation.Figure 30.36shows how a laser can be constructed to enhance the stimulated emission of radiation.
Energy input can be from a flash tube, electrical discharge, or other sources, in a process sometimes called optical
pumping. A large percentage of the original pumping energy is dissipated in other forms, but a population inversion
must be achieved. Mirrors can be used to enhance stimulated emission by multiple passes of the radiation back and
forth through the lasing material. One of the mirrors is semitransparent to allow some of the light to pass through.
The laser output from a laser is a mere 1% of the light passing back and forth in a laser.
As described earlier in the section on laser vision correction, Donna Strickland and Gérard Mourou, working at
University of Rochester, developed a method to greatly increase the power of lasers, while also enabling them to be
miniaturized. By passing the light over a specific type of grating, their method segments (or chirps) the delivery of
the beam components in a matter that generates little heat at the source. Chirped pulse amplification is now used in
some of the world’s most powerful lasers as well as those commonly used to make precise microcuts or burns in
medical applications. Strickland and Mourou were awarded the Nobel Prize in 1918.
FIGURE30.36Typical laser construction has a method of pumping energy into the lasing material to produce a population inversion. (a)
Spontaneous emission begins with some photons escaping and others stimulating further emissions. (b) and (c) Mirrors are used to
enhance the probability of stimulated emission by passing photons through the material several times.
Lasers are constructed from many types of lasing materials, including gases, liquids, solids, and semiconductors.
But all lasers are based on the existence of a metastable state or a phosphorescent material. Some lasers produce
PAGE: 1366
1348 30 • Atomic Physics
continuous output; others are pulsed in bursts as brief as . Some laser outputs are fantastically
powerful—some greater than —but the more common, everyday lasers produce something on the order of
. The helium-neon laser that produces a familiar red light is very common.Figure 30.37shows the energy
levels of helium and neon, a pair of noble gases that work well together. An electrical discharge is passed through a
helium-neon gas mixture in which the number of atoms of helium is ten times that of neon. The first excited state of
helium is metastable and, thus, stores energy. This energy is easily transferred by collision to neon atoms, because
they have an excited state at nearly the same energy as that in helium. That state in neon is also metastable, and
this is the one that produces the laser output. (The most likely transition is to the nearby state, producing 1.96 eV
photons, which have a wavelength of 633 nm and appear red.) A population inversion can be produced in neon,
because there are so many more helium atoms and these put energy into the neon. Helium-neon lasers often have
continuous output, because the population inversion can be maintained even while lasing occurs. Probably the most
common lasers in use today, including the common laser pointer, are semiconductor or diode lasers, made of
silicon. Here, energy is pumped into the material by passing a current in the device to excite the electrons. Special
coatings on the ends and fine cleavings of the semiconductor material allow light to bounce back and forth and a
tiny fraction to emerge as laser light. Diode lasers can usually run continually and produce outputs in the milliwatt
range.
FIGURE30.37Energy levels in helium and neon. In the common helium-neon laser, an electrical discharge pumps energy into the
metastable states of both atoms. The gas mixture has about ten times more helium atoms than neon atoms. Excited helium atoms easily
de-excite by transferring energy to neon in a collision. A population inversion in neon is achieved, allowing lasing by the neon to occur.
There are many medical applications of lasers. Lasers have the advantage that they can be focused to a small spot.
They also have a well-defined wavelength. Many types of lasers are available today that provide wavelengths from
the ultraviolet to the infrared. This is important, as one needs to be able to select a wavelength that will be
preferentially absorbed by the material of interest. Objects appear a certain color because they absorb all other
visible colors incident upon them. What wavelengths are absorbed depends upon the energy spacing between
electron orbitals in that molecule. Unlike the hydrogen atom, biological molecules are complex and have a variety of
absorption wavelengths or lines. But these can be determined and used in the selection of a laser with the
appropriate wavelength. Water is transparent to the visible spectrum but will absorb light in the UV and IR regions.
Blood (hemoglobin) strongly reflects red but absorbs most strongly in the UV.
Laser surgery uses a wavelength that is strongly absorbed by the tissue it is focused upon. One example of a
medical application of lasers is shown inFigure 30.38. A detached retina can result in total loss of vision. Burns
made by a laser focused to a small spot on the retina form scar tissue that can hold the retina in place, salvaging the
patient’s vision. Other light sources cannot be focused as precisely as a laser due to refractive dispersion of different
wavelengths. Similarly, laser surgery in the form of cutting or burning away tissue is made more accurate because
laser output can be very precisely focused and is preferentially absorbed because of its single wavelength.
Depending upon what part or layer of the retina needs repairing, the appropriate type of laser can be selected. For
the repair of tears in the retina, a green argon laser is generally used. This light is absorbed well by tissues
containing blood, so coagulation or “welding” of the tear can be done.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1367
30.5 • Applications of Atomic Excitations and De-Excitations 1349
FIGURE30.38A detached retina is burned by a laser designed to focus on a small spot on the retina, the resulting scar tissue holding it in
place. The lens of the eye is used to focus the light, as is the device bringing the laser output to the eye.
In dentistry, the use of lasers is rising. Lasers are most commonly used for surgery on the soft tissue of the mouth.
They can be used to remove ulcers, stop bleeding, and reshape gum tissue. Their use in cutting into bones and teeth
is not quite so common; here the erbium YAG (yttrium aluminum garnet) laser is used.
The massive combination of lasers shown inFigure 30.39can be used to induce nuclear fusion, the energy source of
the sun and hydrogen bombs. Since lasers can produce very high power in very brief pulses, they can be used to
focus an enormous amount of energy on a small glass sphere containing fusion fuel. Not only does the incident
energy increase the fuel temperature significantly so that fusion can occur, it also compresses the fuel to great
density, enhancing the probability of fusion. The compression or implosion is caused by the momentum of the
impinging laser photons.
FIGURE30.39This system of lasers at Lawrence Livermore Laboratory is used to ignite nuclear fusion. A tremendous burst of energy is
focused on a small fuel pellet, which is imploded to the high density and temperature needed to make the fusion reaction proceed. (credit:
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC, and the Department of Energy)
Before being largely replaced by streaming services and other storage methods, music CDs and DVDs were
extremely common. They store information digitally and have a much larger information-storage capacity than their
predecessors, audio and video cassette tapes. An entire encyclopedia can be stored on a single CD.Figure 30.40
illustrates how the information is stored and read from the CD. Pits made in the CD by a laser can be tiny and very
accurately spaced to record digital information. These are read by having an inexpensive solid-state infrared laser
beam scatter from pits as the CD spins, revealing their digital pattern and the information encoded upon them.
PAGE: 1368
1350 30 • Atomic Physics
FIGURE30.40A CD has digital information stored in the form of laser-created pits on its surface. These in turn can be read by detecting the
laser light scattered from the pit. Large information capacity is possible because of the precision of the laser. Shorter-wavelength lasers
enable greater storage capacity.
Holograms, such as those inFigure 30.41, are true three-dimensional images recorded on film by lasers. Holograms
are used for amusement, decoration on novelty items and magazine covers, security on credit cards and driver’s
licenses (a laser and other equipment is needed to reproduce them), and for serious three-dimensional information
storage. You can see that a hologram is a true three-dimensional image, because objects change relative position in
the image when viewed from different angles.
FIGURE30.41Credit cards commonly have holograms for logos, making them difficult to reproduce (credit: Dominic Alves, Flickr)
The namehologrammeans “entire picture” (from the Greekholo, as in holistic), because the image is three-
dimensional.Holographyis the process of producing holograms and, although they are recorded on photographic
film, the process is quite different from normal photography. Holography uses light interference or wave optics,
whereas normal photography uses geometric optics.Figure 30.42shows one method of producing a hologram.
Coherent light from a laser is split by a mirror, with part of the light illuminating the object. The remainder, called the
reference beam, shines directly on a piece of film. Light scattered from the object interferes with the reference
beam, producing constructive and destructive interference. As a result, the exposed film looks foggy, but close
examination reveals a complicated interference pattern stored on it. Where the interference was constructive, the
film (a negative actually) is darkened. Holography is sometimes called lensless photography, because it uses the
wave characteristics of light as contrasted to normal photography, which uses geometric optics and so requires
lenses.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1369
30.5 • Applications of Atomic Excitations and De-Excitations 1351
FIGURE30.42Production of a hologram. Single-wavelength coherent light from a laser produces a well-defined interference pattern on a
piece of film. The laser beam is split by a partially silvered mirror, with part of the light illuminating the object and the remainder shining
directly on the film.
Light falling on a hologram can form a three-dimensional image. The process is complicated in detail, but the basics
can be understood as shown inFigure 30.43, in which a laser of the same type that exposed the film is now used to
illuminate it. The myriad tiny exposed regions of the film are dark and block the light, while less exposed regions
allow light to pass. The film thus acts much like a collection of diffraction gratings with various spacings. Light
passing through the hologram is diffracted in various directions, producing both real and virtual images of the object
used to expose the film. The interference pattern is the same as that produced by the object. Moving your eye to
various places in the interference pattern gives you different perspectives, just as looking directly at the object
would. The image thus looks like the object and is three-dimensional like the object.
FIGURE30.43A transmission hologram is one that produces real and virtual images when a laser of the same type as that which exposed
the hologram is passed through it. Diffraction from various parts of the film produces the same interference pattern as the object that was
used to expose it.
The hologram illustrated inFigure 30.43is a transmission hologram. Holograms that are viewed with reflected light,
such as the white light holograms on credit cards, are reflection holograms and are more common. White light
holograms often appear a little blurry with rainbow edges, because the diffraction patterns of various colors of light
are at slightly different locations due to their different wavelengths. Further uses of holography include all types of
3-D information storage, such as of statues in museums and engineering studies of structures and 3-D images of
human organs. Invented in the late 1940s by Dennis Gabor (1900–1979), who won the 1971 Nobel Prize in Physics
for his work, holography became far more practical with the development of the laser. Since lasers produce
coherent single-wavelength light, their interference patterns are more pronounced. The precision is so great that it
is even possible to record numerous holograms on a single piece of film by just changing the angle of the film for
each successive image. This is how the holograms that move as you walk by them are produced—a kind of lensless
movie.
In a similar way, in the medical field, holograms have allowed complete 3-D holographic displays of objects from a
stack of images. Storing these images for future use is relatively easy. With the use of an endoscope, high-resolution
3-D holographic images of internal organs and tissues can be made.
PAGE: 1370
1352 30 • Atomic Physics
30.6 The Wave Nature of Matter Causes Quantization
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain Bohr’s model of atom.
• Define and describe quantization of angular momentum.
• Calculate the angular momentum for an orbit of atom.
• Define and describe the wave-like properties of matter.
After visiting some of the applications of different aspects of atomic physics, we now return to the basic theory that
was built upon Bohr’s atom. Einstein once said it was important to keep asking the questions we eventually teach
children not to ask. Why is angular momentum quantized? You already know the answer. Electrons have wave-like
properties, as de Broglie later proposed. They can exist only where they interfere constructively, and only certain
orbits meet proper conditions, as we shall see in the next module.
Following Bohr’s initial work on the hydrogen atom, a decade was to pass before de Broglie proposed that matter
has wave properties. The wave-like properties of matter were subsequently confirmed by observations of electron
interference when scattered from crystals. Electrons can exist only in locations where they interfere constructively.
How does this affect electrons in atomic orbits? When an electron is bound to an atom, its wavelength must fit into a
small space, something like a standing wave on a string. (SeeFigure 30.44.) Allowed orbits are those orbits in which
an electron constructively interferes with itself. Not all orbits produce constructive interference. Thus only certain
orbits are allowed—the orbits are quantized.
FIGURE30.44(a) Waves on a string have a wavelength related to the length of the string, allowing them to interfere constructively. (b) If we
imagine the string bent into a closed circle, we get a rough idea of how electrons in circular orbits can interfere constructively. (c) If the
wavelength does not fit into the circumference, the electron interferes destructively; it cannot exist in such an orbit.
For a circular orbit, constructive interference occurs when the electron’s wavelength fits neatly into the
circumference, so that wave crests always align with crests and wave troughs align with troughs, as shown inFigure
30.44(b). More precisely, when an integral multiple of the electron’s wavelength equals the circumference of the
orbit, constructive interference is obtained. In equation form, thecondition for constructive interference and an
allowed electron orbitis
30.38
where is the electron’s wavelength and is the radius of that circular orbit. The de Broglie wavelength is
, and so here . Substituting this into the previous condition for constructive interference
produces an interesting result:
30.39
Rearranging terms, and noting that for a circular orbit, we obtain the quantization of angular momentum as
the condition for allowed orbits:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1371
30.6 • The Wave Nature of Matter Causes Quantization 1353
30.40
This is what Bohr was forced to hypothesize as the rule for allowed orbits, as stated earlier. We now realize that it is
the condition for constructive interference of an electron in a circular orbit.Figure 30.45illustrates this for
and
Waves and Quantization
The wave nature of matter is responsible for the quantization of energy levels in bound systems. Only those
states where matter interferes constructively exist, or are “allowed.” Since there is a lowest orbit where this is
possible in an atom, the electron cannot spiral into the nucleus. It cannot exist closer to or inside the nucleus.
The wave nature of matter is what prevents matter from collapsing and gives atoms their sizes.
FIGURE30.45The third and fourth allowed circular orbits have three and four wavelengths, respectively, in their circumferences.
Because of the wave character of matter, the idea of well-defined orbits gives way to a model in which there is a
cloud of probability, consistent with Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle.Figure 30.46shows how this applies to the
ground state of hydrogen. If you try to follow the electron in some well-defined orbit using a probe that has a small
enough wavelength to get some details, you will instead knock the electron out of its orbit. Each measurement of
the electron’s position will find it to be in a definite location somewhere near the nucleus. Repeated measurements
reveal a cloud of probability like that in the figure, with each speck the location determined by a single
measurement. There is not a well-defined, circular-orbit type of distribution. Nature again proves to be different on a
small scale than on a macroscopic scale.
FIGURE30.46The ground state of a hydrogen atom has a probability cloud describing the position of its electron. The probability of finding
the electron is proportional to the darkness of the cloud. The electron can be closer or farther than the Bohr radius, but it is very unlikely to
be a great distance from the nucleus.
There are many examples in which the wave nature of matter causes quantization in bound systems such as the
atom. Whenever a particle is confined or bound to a small space, its allowed wavelengths are those which fit into
PAGE: 1372
1354 30 • Atomic Physics
that space. For example, the particle in a box model describes a particle free to move in a small space surrounded
by impenetrable barriers. This is true in blackbody radiators (atoms and molecules) as well as in atomic and
molecular spectra. Various atoms and molecules will have different sets of electron orbits, depending on the size
and complexity of the system. When a system is large, such as a grain of sand, the tiny particle waves in it can fit in
so many ways that it becomes impossible to see that the allowed states are discrete. Thus the correspondence
principle is satisfied. As systems become large, they gradually look less grainy, and quantization becomes less
evident. Unbound systems (small or not), such as an electron freed from an atom, do not have quantized energies,
since their wavelengths are not constrained to fit in a certain volume.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Quantum Wave Interference
When do photons, electrons, and atoms behave like particles and when do they behave like waves? Watch waves
spread out and interfere as they pass through a double slit, then get detected on a screen as tiny dots. Use quantum
detectors to explore how measurements change the waves and the patterns they produce on the screen.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/l/21intquawavint).
30.7 Patterns in Spectra Reveal More Quantization
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• State and discuss the Zeeman effect.
• Define orbital magnetic field.
• Define orbital angular momentum.
• Define space quantization.
High-resolution measurements of atomic and molecular spectra show that the spectral lines are even more complex
than they first appear. In this section, we will see that this complexity has yielded important new information about
electrons and their orbits in atoms.
In order to explore the substructure of atoms (and knowing that magnetic fields affect moving charges), the Dutch
physicist Hendrik Lorentz (1853–1930) suggested that his student Pieter Zeeman (1865–1943) study how spectra
might be affected by magnetic fields. What they found became known as theZeeman effect, which involved
spectral lines being split into two or more separate emission lines by an external magnetic field, as shown inFigure
30.47. For their discoveries, Zeeman and Lorentz shared the 1902 Nobel Prize in Physics.
Zeeman splitting is complex. Some lines split into three lines, some into five, and so on. But one general feature is
that the amount the split lines are separated is proportional to the applied field strength, indicating an interaction
with a moving charge. The splitting means that the quantized energy of an orbit is affected by an external magnetic
field, causing the orbit to have several discrete energies instead of one. Even without an external magnetic field,
very precise measurements showed that spectral lines are doublets (split into two), apparently by magnetic fields
within the atom itself.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1373
30.7 • Patterns in Spectra Reveal More Quantization 1355
FIGURE30.47The Zeeman effect is the splitting of spectral lines when a magnetic field is applied. The number of lines formed varies, but
the spread is proportional to the strength of the applied field. (a) Two spectral lines with no external magnetic field. (b) The lines split when
the field is applied. (c) The splitting is greater when a stronger field is applied.
Bohr’s theory of circular orbits is useful for visualizing how an electron’s orbit is affected by a magnetic field. The
circular orbit forms a current loop, which creates a magnetic field of its own, as seen inFigure 30.48. Note that
theorbital magnetic field and theorbital angular momentum are along the same line. The external
magnetic field and the orbital magnetic field interact; a torque is exerted to align them. A torque rotating a system
through some angle does work so that there is energy associated with this interaction. Thus, orbits at different
angles to the external magnetic field have different energies. What is remarkable is that the energies are
quantized—the magnetic field splits the spectral lines into several discrete lines that have different energies. This
means that only certain angles are allowed between the orbital angular momentum and the external field, as seen in
Figure 30.49.
FIGURE30.48The approximate picture of an electron in a circular orbit illustrates how the current loop produces its own magnetic field,
called . It also shows how is along the same line as the orbital angular momentum .
PAGE: 1374
1356 30 • Atomic Physics
FIGURE30.49Only certain angles are allowed between the orbital angular momentum and an external magnetic field. This is implied by
the fact that the Zeeman effect splits spectral lines into several discrete lines. Each line is associated with an angle between the external
magnetic field and magnetic fields due to electrons and their orbits.
We already know that the magnitude of angular momentum is quantized for electron orbits in atoms. The new
insight is that thedirection of the orbital angular momentum is also quantized. The fact that the orbital angular
momentum can have only certain directions is calledspace quantization. Like many aspects of quantum
mechanics, this quantization of direction is totally unexpected. On the macroscopic scale, orbital angular
momentum, such as that of the moon around the earth, can have any magnitude and be in any direction.
Detailed treatment of space quantization began to explain some complexities of atomic spectra, but certain patterns
seemed to be caused by something else. As mentioned, spectral lines are actually closely spaced doublets, a
characteristic calledfine structure, as shown inFigure 30.50. The doublet changes when a magnetic field is
applied, implying that whatever causes the doublet interacts with a magnetic field. In 1925, Sem Goudsmit and
George Uhlenbeck, two Dutch physicists, successfully argued that electrons have properties analogous to a
macroscopic charge spinning on its axis. Electrons, in fact, have an internal or intrinsic angular momentum called
intrinsic spin .Since electrons are charged, their intrinsic spin creates anintrinsic magnetic field , which
interacts with their orbital magnetic field . Furthermore,electronintrinsic spinis quantized in magnitude and
direction, analogous to the situation for orbital angular momentum. The spin of the electron can have only one
magnitude, and its direction can be at only one of two angles relative to a magnetic field, as seen inFigure 30.51.
We refer to this as spin up or spin down for the electron. Each spin direction has a different energy; hence,
spectroscopic lines are split into two. Spectral doublets are now understood as being due to electron spin.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1375
30.8 • Quantum Numbers and Rules 1357
FIGURE30.50Fine structure. Upon close examination, spectral lines are doublets, even in the absence of an external magnetic field. The
electron has an intrinsic magnetic field that interacts with its orbital magnetic field.
FIGURE30.51The intrinsic magnetic field of an electron is attributed to its spin, , roughly pictured to be due to its charge spinning on
its axis. This is only a crude model, since electrons seem to have no size. The spin and intrinsic magnetic field of the electron can make only
one of two angles with another magnetic field, such as that created by the electron’s orbital motion. Space is quantized for spin as well as
for orbital angular momentum.
These two new insights—that the direction of angular momentum, whether orbital or spin, is quantized, and that
electrons have intrinsic spin—help to explain many of the complexities of atomic and molecular spectra. In magnetic
resonance imaging, it is the way that the intrinsic magnetic field of hydrogen and biological atoms interact with an
external field that underlies the diagnostic fundamentals.
30.8 Quantum Numbers and Rules
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define quantum number.
• Calculate angle of angular momentum vector with an axis.
• Define spin quantum number.
Physical characteristics that are quantized—such as energy, charge, and angular momentum—are of such
importance that names and symbols are given to them. The values of quantized entities are expressed in terms of
quantum numbers, and the rules governing them are of the utmost importance in determining what nature is and
PAGE: 1376
1358 30 • Atomic Physics
does. This section covers some of the more important quantum numbers and rules—all of which apply in chemistry,
material science, and far beyond the realm of atomic physics, where they were first discovered. Once again, we see
how physics makes discoveries which enable other fields to grow.
Theenergy states of bound systems are quantized, because the particle wavelength can fit into the bounds of the
system in only certain ways. This was elaborated for the hydrogen atom, for which the allowed energies are
expressed as , where . We define to be the principal quantum number that labels the
basic states of a system. The lowest-energy state has , the first excited state has , and so on. Thus the
allowed values for the principal quantum number are
30.41
This is more than just a numbering scheme, since the energy of the system, such as the hydrogen atom, can be
expressed as some function of , as can other characteristics (such as the orbital radii of the hydrogen atom).
The fact that themagnitude of angular momentum is quantizedwas first recognized by Bohr in relation to the
hydrogen atom; it is now known to be true in general. With the development of quantum mechanics, it was found
that the magnitude of angular momentum can have only the values
30.42
where is defined to be theangular momentum quantum number. The rule for in atoms is given in the
parentheses. Given , the value of can be any integer from zero up to . For example, if , then can be 0,
1, 2, or 3.
Note that for , can only be zero. This means that the ground-state angular momentum for hydrogen is
actually zero, not as Bohr proposed. The picture of circular orbits is not valid, because there would be angular
momentum for any circular orbit. A more valid picture is the cloud of probability shown for the ground state of
hydrogen inFigure 30.46. The electron actually spends time in and near the nucleus. The reason the electron does
not remain in the nucleus is related to Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle—the electron’s energy would have to be
much too large to be confined to the small space of the nucleus. Now the first excited state of hydrogen has ,
so that can be either 0 or 1, according to the rule in . Similarly, for , can be 0, 1, or 2. It is
often most convenient to state the value of , a simple integer, rather than calculating the value of from
. For example, for , we see that
30.43
It is much simpler to state .
As recognized in the Zeeman effect, thedirection of angular momentum is quantized. We now know this is true in all
circumstances. It is found that the component of angular momentum along one direction in space, usually called the
-axis, can have only certain values of . The direction in space must be related to something physical, such as the
direction of the magnetic field at that location. This is an aspect of relativity. Direction has no meaning if there is
nothing that varies with direction, as does magnetic force. The allowed values of are
30.44
where is the -component of the angular momentumand is the angular momentum projection quantum
number. The rule in parentheses for the values of is that it can range from to in steps of one. For example, if
, then can have the five values –2, –1, 0, 1, and 2. Each corresponds to a different energy in the
presence of a magnetic field, so that they are related to the splitting of spectral lines into discrete parts, as
discussed in the preceding section. If the -component of angular momentum can have only certain values, then the
angular momentum can have only certain directions, as illustrated inFigure 30.52.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1377
30.8 • Quantum Numbers and Rules 1359
FIGURE30.52The component of a given angular momentum along the -axis (defined by the direction of a magnetic field) can have only
certain values; these are shown here for , for which . The direction of is quantized in the sense that it can have
only certain angles relative to the -axis.
EXAMPLE 30.3
What Are the Allowed Directions?
Calculate the angles that the angular momentum vector can make with the -axis for , as illustrated inFigure
30.52.
Strategy
Figure 30.52represents the vectors and as usual, with arrows proportional to their magnitudes and pointing in
the correct directions. and form a right triangle, with being the hypotenuse and the adjacent side. This
means that the ratio of to is the cosine of the angle of interest. We can find and using
and .
Solution
We are given , so that can be +1, 0, or −1. Thus has the value given by .
30.45
can have three values, given by .
30.46
As can be seen inFigure 30.52, and so for , we have
30.47
PAGE: 1378
1360 30 • Atomic Physics
Thus,
30.48
Similarly, for , we find ; thus,
30.49
And for ,
30.50
so that
30.51
Discussion
The angles are consistent with the figure. Only the angle relative to the -axis is quantized. can point in any
direction as long as it makes the proper angle with the -axis. Thus the angular momentum vectors lie on cones as
illustrated. This behavior is not observed on the large scale. To see how the correspondence principle holds here,
consider that the smallest angle ( in the example) is for the maximum value of , namely . For that
smallest angle,
30.52
which approaches 1 as becomes very large. If , then . Furthermore, for large , there are many
values of , so that all angles become possible as gets very large.
Intrinsic Spin Angular Momentum Is Quantized in Magnitude and Direction
There are two more quantum numbers of immediate concern. Both were first discovered for electrons in conjunction
with fine structure in atomic spectra. It is now well established that electrons and other fundamental particles have
intrinsic spin, roughly analogous to a planet spinning on its axis. This spin is a fundamental characteristic of
particles, and only one magnitude of intrinsic spin is allowed for a given type of particle. Intrinsic angular
momentum is quantized independently of orbital angular momentum. Additionally, the direction of the spin is also
quantized. It has been found that themagnitude of the intrinsic (internal) spin angular momentum, , of an
electron is given by
30.53
where is defined to be thespin quantum number. This is very similar to the quantization of given in
, except that the only value allowed for for electrons is 1/2.
Thedirection of intrinsic spin is quantized, just as is the direction of orbital angular momentum. The direction of spin
angular momentum along one direction in space, again called the -axis, can have only the values
30.54
for electrons. is the -component of spin angular momentumand is thespin projection quantum number.
For electrons, can only be 1/2, and can be either +1/2 or –1/2. Spin projection is referred to asspin
up, whereas is calledspin down. These are illustrated inFigure 30.51.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1379
30.8 • Quantum Numbers and Rules 1361
Intrinsic Spin
In later chapters, we will see that intrinsic spin is a characteristic of all subatomic particles. For some particles
is half-integral, whereas for others is integral—there are crucial differences between half-integral spin particles
and integral spin particles. Protons and neutrons, like electrons, have , whereas photons have , and
other particles called pions have , and so on.
To summarize, the state of a system, such as the precise nature of an electron in an atom, is determined by its
particular quantum numbers. These are expressed in the form —seeTable 30.1For electrons in
atoms, the principal quantum number can have the values . Once is known, the values of the angular
momentum quantum number are limited to . For a given value of , the angular momentum
projection quantum number can have only the values . Electron spin is
independent of and , always having . The spin projection quantum number can have two values,
.
Name Symbol Allowed values
Principal quantum number
Angular momentum
Angular momentum projection
1
Spin
Spin projection
TABLE30.1Atomic Quantum Numbers
Figure 30.53shows several hydrogen states corresponding to different sets of quantum numbers. Note that these
clouds of probability are the locations of electrons as determined by making repeated measurements—each
measurement finds the electron in a definite location, with a greater chance of finding the electron in some places
rather than others. With repeated measurements, the pattern of probability shown in the figure emerges. The clouds
of probability do not look like nor do they correspond to classical orbits. The uncertainty principle actually prevents
us and nature from knowing how the electron gets from one place to another, and so an orbit really does not exist as
such. Nature on a small scale is again much different from that on the large scale.
1 The spin quantum numbersis usually not stated, since it is always 1/2 for electrons
PAGE: 1380
1362 30 • Atomic Physics
FIGURE30.53Probability clouds for the electron in the ground state and several excited states of hydrogen. The nature of these states is
determined by their sets of quantum numbers, here given as . The ground state is (0, 0, 0); one of the possibilities for the second
excited state is (3, 2, 1). The probability of finding the electron is indicated by the shade of color; the darker the coloring the greater the
chance of finding the electron.
We will see that the quantum numbers discussed in this section are valid for a broad range of particles and other
systems, such as nuclei. Some quantum numbers, such as intrinsic spin, are related to fundamental classifications
of subatomic particles, and they obey laws that will give us further insight into the substructure of matter and its
interactions.
30.9 The Pauli Exclusion Principle
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define the composition of an atom along with its electrons, neutrons, and protons.
• Explain the Pauli exclusion principle and its application to the atom.
• Specify the shell and subshell symbols and their positions.
• Define the position of electrons in different shells of an atom.
• State the position of each element in the periodic table according to shell filling.
Multiple-Electron Atoms
All atoms except hydrogen are multiple-electron atoms. The physical and chemical properties of elements are
directly related to the number of electrons a neutral atom has. The periodic table of the elements groups elements
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1381
30.9 • The Pauli Exclusion Principle 1363
with similar properties into columns. This systematic organization is related to the number of electrons in a neutral
atom, called theatomic number, . We shall see in this section that the exclusion principle is key to the underlying
explanations, and that it applies far beyond the realm of atomic physics.
In 1925, the Austrian physicist Wolfgang Pauli (seeFigure 30.54) proposed the following rule: No two electrons can
have the same set of quantum numbers. That is, no two electrons can be in the same state. This statement is known
as thePauli exclusion principle, because it excludes electrons from being in the same state. The Pauli exclusion
principle is extremely powerful and very broadly applicable. It applies to any identical particles with half-integral
intrinsic spin—that is, having Thus no two electrons can have the same set of quantum numbers.
Pauli Exclusion Principle
No two electrons can have the same set of quantum numbers. That is, no two electrons can be in the same
state.
FIGURE30.54The Austrian physicist Wolfgang Pauli (1900–1958) played a major role in the development of quantum mechanics. He
proposed the exclusion principle; hypothesized the existence of an important particle, called the neutrino, before it was directly observed;
made fundamental contributions to several areas of theoretical physics; and influenced many students who went on to do important work
of their own. (credit: Nobel Foundation, via Wikimedia Commons)
Let us examine how the exclusion principle applies to electrons in atoms. The quantum numbers involved were
defined inQuantum Numbers and Rulesas , and . Since is always for electrons, it is redundant to
list , and so we omit it and specify the state of an electron by a set of four numbers . For example, the
quantum numbers completely specify the state of an electron in an atom.
Since no two electrons can have the same set of quantum numbers, there are limits to how many of them can be in
the same energy state. Note that determines the energy state in the absence of a magnetic field. So we first
choose , and then we see how many electrons can be in this energy state or energy level. Consider the level,
for example. The only value can have is 0 (seeTable 30.1for a list of possible values once is known), and thus
can only be 0. The spin projection can be either or , and so there can be two electrons in the
state. One has quantum numbers , and the other has .Figure 30.55illustrates that
there can be one or two electrons having , but not three.
PAGE: 1382
1364 30 • Atomic Physics
FIGURE30.55The Pauli exclusion principle explains why some configurations of electrons are allowed while others are not. Since
electrons cannot have the same set of quantum numbers, a maximum of two can be in the level, and a third electron must reside in
the higher-energy level. If there are two electrons in the level, their spins must be in opposite directions. (More precisely, their
spin projections must differ.)
Shells and Subshells
Because of the Pauli exclusion principle, only hydrogen and helium can have all of their electrons in the state.
Lithium (see the periodic table) has three electrons, and so one must be in the level. This leads to the concept
of shells and shell filling. As we progress up in the number of electrons, we go from hydrogen to helium, lithium,
beryllium, boron, and so on, and we see that there are limits to the number of electrons for each value of . Higher
values of the shell correspond to higher energies, and they can allow more electrons because of the various
combinations of , and that are possible. Each value of the principal quantum number thus corresponds to
an atomicshellinto which a limited number of electrons can go. Shells and the number of electrons in them
determine the physical and chemical properties of atoms, since it is the outermost electrons that interact most with
anything outside the atom.
The probability clouds of electrons with the lowest value of are closest to the nucleus and, thus, more tightly
bound. Thus when shells fill, they start with , progress to , and so on. Each value of thus corresponds to
asubshell.
The table given below lists symbols traditionally used to denote shells and subshells.
Shell Subshell
Symbol
1 0
2 1
3 2
4 3
TABLE30.2Shell and
Subshell Symbols
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1383
30.9 • The Pauli Exclusion Principle 1365
Shell Subshell
5 4
5
2
6
TABLE30.2Shell and
Subshell Symbols
To denote shells and subshells, we write with a number for and a letter for . For example, an electron in the
state must have , and it is denoted as a electron. Two electrons in the state is denoted as .
Another example is an electron in the state with , written as . The case of three electrons with these
quantum numbers is written . This notation, called spectroscopic notation, is generalized as shown inFigure
30.56.
FIGURE30.56
Counting the number of possible combinations of quantum numbers allowed by the exclusion principle, we can
determine how many electrons it takes to fill each subshell and shell.
EXAMPLE 30.4
How Many Electrons Can Be in This Shell?
List all the possible sets of quantum numbers for the shell, and determine the number of electrons that can
be in the shell and each of its subshells.
Strategy
Given for the shell, the rules for quantum numbers limit to be 0 or 1. The shell therefore has two subshells,
labeled and . Since the lowest subshell fills first, we start with the subshell possibilities and then proceed
with the subshell.
Solution
It is convenient to list the possible quantum numbers in a table, as shown below.
2 It is unusual to deal with subshells having greater than 6, but when encountered, they continue to be labeled in alphabetical order.
PAGE: 1384
1366 30 • Atomic Physics
FIGURE30.57
Discussion
It is laborious to make a table like this every time we want to know how many electrons can be in a shell or subshell.
There exist general rules that are easy to apply, as we shall now see.
The number of electrons that can be in a subshell depends entirely on the value of . Once is known, there are a
fixed number of values of , each of which can have two values for First, since goes from tolin steps of
1, there are possibilities. This number is multiplied by 2, since each electron can be spin up or spin down.
Thus themaximum number of electrons that can be in a subshellis .
For example, the subshell inExample 30.4has a maximum of 2 electrons in it, since for
this subshell. Similarly, the subshell has a maximum of 6 electrons, since . For a shell,
the maximum number is the sum of what can fit in the subshells. Some algebra shows that themaximum number of
electrons that can be in a shellis .
For example, for the first shell , and so . We have already seen that only two electrons can be in the
shell. Similarly, for the second shell, , and so . As found inExample 30.4, the total number of
electrons in the shell is 8.
EXAMPLE 30.5
Subshells and Totals for
How many subshells are in the shell? Identify each subshell, calculate the maximum number of electrons that
will fit into each, and verify that the total is .
Strategy
Subshells are determined by the value of ; thus, we first determine which values of are allowed, and then we apply
the equation “maximum number of electrons that can be in a subshell ” to find the number of electrons
in each subshell.
Solution
Since , we know that can be , or ; thus, there are three possible subshells. In standard notation, they are
labeled the , , and subshells. We have already seen that 2 electrons can be in an state, and 6 in a state,
but let us use the equation “maximum number of electrons that can be in a subshell = ” to calculate the
maximum number in each:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1385
30.9 • The Pauli Exclusion Principle 1367
30.55
The equation “maximum number of electrons that can be in a shell = ” gives the maximum number in the
shell to be
30.56
Discussion
The total number of electrons in the three possible subshells is thus the same as the formula . In standard
(spectroscopic) notation, a filled shell is denoted as . Shells do not fill in a simple manner. Before
the shell is completely filled, for example, we begin to find electrons in the shell.
Shell Filling and the Periodic Table
Table 30.3shows electron configurations for the first 20 elements in the periodic table, starting with hydrogen and
its single electron and ending with calcium. The Pauli exclusion principle determines the maximum number of
electrons allowed in each shell and subshell. But the order in which the shells and subshells are filled is
complicated because of the large numbers of interactions between electrons.
Element Number of electrons (Z) Ground state configuration
H 1
He 2
Li 3
Be 4 "
B 5 "
C 6 "
N 7 "
O 8 "
F 9 "
Ne 10 "
Na 11 "
Mg 12 " " "
Al 13 " " "
TABLE30.3Electron Configurations of Elements Hydrogen Through Calcium
PAGE: 1386
1368 30 • Atomic Physics
Element Number of electrons (Z) Ground state configuration
Si 14 " " "
P 15 " " "
S 16 " " "
Cl 17 " " "
Ar 18 " " "
K 19 " " "
Ca 20 " " " " "
TABLE30.3Electron Configurations of Elements Hydrogen Through Calcium
Examining the above table, you can see that as the number of electrons in an atom increases from 1 in hydrogen to
2 in helium and so on, the lowest-energy shell gets filled first—that is, the shell fills first, and then the
shell begins to fill. Within a shell, the subshells fill starting with the lowest , or with the subshell, then the , and
so on, usually until all subshells are filled. The first exception to this occurs for potassium, where the subshell
begins to fill before any electrons go into the subshell. The next exception is not shown inTable 30.3; it occurs
for rubidium, where the subshell starts to fill before the subshell. The reason for these exceptions is that
electrons have probability clouds that penetrate closer to the nucleus and, thus, are more tightly bound (lower in
energy).
Figure 30.58shows the periodic table of the elements, through element 118. Of special interest are elements in the
main groups, namely, those in the columns numbered 1, 2, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, and 18.
FIGURE30.58Periodic table of the elements (credit: National Institute of Standards and Technology, U.S. Department of Commerce)
The number of electrons in the outermost subshell determines the atom’s chemical properties, since it is these
electrons that are farthest from the nucleus and thus interact most with other atoms. If the outermost subshell can
accept or give up an electron easily, then the atom will be highly reactive chemically. Each group in the periodic
table is characterized by its outermost electron configuration. Perhaps the most familiar is Group 18 (Group VIII),
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1387
30.9 • The Pauli Exclusion Principle 1369
the noble gases (helium, neon, argon, etc.). These gases are all characterized by a filled outer subshell that is
particularly stable. This means that they have large ionization energies and do not readily give up an electron.
Furthermore, if they were to accept an extra electron, it would be in a significantly higher level and thus loosely
bound. Chemical reactions often involve sharing electrons. Noble gases can be forced into unstable chemical
compounds only under high pressure and temperature.
Group 17 (Group VII) contains the halogens, such as fluorine, chlorine, iodine and bromine, each of which has one
less electron than a neighboring noble gas. Each halogen has 5 electrons (a configuration), while the subshell
can hold 6 electrons. This means the halogens have one vacancy in their outermost subshell. They thus readily
accept an extra electron (it becomes tightly bound, closing the shell as in noble gases) and are highly reactive
chemically. The halogens are also likely to form singly negative ions, such as , fitting an extra electron into the
vacancy in the outer subshell. In contrast, alkali metals, such as sodium and potassium, all have a single electron
in their outermost subshell (an configuration) and are members of Group 1 (Group I). These elements easily give
up their extra electron and are thus highly reactive chemically. As you might expect, they also tend to form singly
positive ions, such as , by losing their loosely bound outermost electron. They are metals (conductors), because
the loosely bound outer electron can move freely.
Of course, other groups are also of interest. Carbon, silicon, and germanium, for example, have similar chemistries
and are in Group 4 (Group IV). Carbon, in particular, is extraordinary in its ability to form many types of bonds and to
be part of long chains, such as inorganic molecules. The large group of what are called transitional elements is
characterized by the filling of the subshells and crossing of energy levels. Heavier groups, such as the lanthanide
series, are more complex—their shells do not fill in simple order. But the groups recognized by chemists such as
Mendeleev have an explanation in the substructure of atoms.
PAGE: 1388
1370 30 • Glossary
Glossary
angular momentum quantum number a quantum momentum of electrons
number associated with the angular momentum of laser acronym for light amplification by stimulated
electrons emission of radiation
atom basic unit of matter, which consists of a central, magnitude of the intrinsic (internal) spin angular
positively charged nucleus surrounded by negatively momentum given by
charged electrons metastable a state whose lifetime is an order of
atomic de-excitation process by which an atom magnitude longer than the most short-lived states
transfers from an excited electronic state back to orbital angular momentum an angular momentum
the ground state electronic configuration; often that corresponds to the quantum analog of classical
occurs by emission of a photon angular momentum
atomic excitation a state in which an atom or ion orbital magnetic field the magnetic field generated
acquires the necessary energy to promote one or due to the orbital motion of electrons
more of its electrons to electronic states higher in Pauli exclusion principle a principle that states that
energy than their ground state no two electrons can have the same set of quantum
atomic number the number of protons in the nucleus numbers; that is, no two electrons can be in the
of an atom same state
Bohr radius the mean radius of the orbit of an phosphorescence the de-excitation of a metastable
electron around the nucleus of a hydrogen atom in state
its ground state planetary model of the atom the most familiar
Brownian motion the continuous random movement model or illustration of the structure of the atom
of particles of matter suspended in a liquid or gas population inversion the condition in which the
cathode-ray tube a vacuum tube containing a source majority of atoms in a sample are in a metastable
of electrons and a screen to view images state
double-slit interference an experiment in which quantum numbers the values of quantized entities,
waves or particles from a single source impinge such as energy and angular momentum
upon two slits so that the resulting interference Rydberg constant a physical constant related to the
pattern may be observed atomic spectra with an established value of
energies of hydrogen-like atoms Bohr formula for
energies of electron states in hydrogen-like atoms:
shell a probability cloud for electrons that has a
single principal quantum number
space quantization the fact that the orbital angular
energy-level diagram a diagram used to analyze the
momentum can have only certain directions
energy level of electrons in the orbits of an atom
spin projection quantum number quantum number
fine structure the splitting of spectral lines of the
that can be used to calculate the intrinsic electron
hydrogen spectrum when the spectral lines are
angular momentum along the -axis
examined at very high resolution
spin quantum number the quantum number that
fluorescence any process in which an atom or
parameterizes the intrinsic angular momentum (or
molecule, excited by a photon of a given energy, de-
spin angular momentum, or simply spin) of a given
excites by emission of a lower-energy photon
particle
hologram meansentire picture(from the Greek word
stimulated emission emission by atom or molecule
holo, as in holistic), because the image produced is
in which an excited state is stimulated to decay,
three dimensional
most readily caused by a photon of the same energy
holography the process of producing holograms
that is necessary to excite the state
hydrogen spectrum wavelengths the wavelengths of
subshell the probability cloud for electrons that has a
visible light from hydrogen; can be calculated by
single angular momentum quantum number
x rays a form of electromagnetic radiation
x-ray diffraction a technique that provides the
hydrogen-like atom any atom with only a single
detailed information about crystallographic
electron
structure of natural and manufactured materials
intrinsic magnetic field the magnetic field generated
z-component of spin angular momentum
due to the intrinsic spin of electrons
component of intrinsic electron spin along the
intrinsic spin the internal or intrinsic angular
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1389
30 • Section Summary 1371
-axis -axis
z-component of the angular momentum component Zeeman effect the effect of external magnetic fields
of orbital angular momentum of electron along the on spectral lines
Section Summary
30.1Discovery of the Atom must be greater than .
• Bohr correctly proposed that the energy and radii
• Atoms are the smallest unit of elements; atoms
of the orbits of electrons in atoms are quantized,
combine to form molecules, the smallest unit of
with energy for transitions between orbits given by
compounds.
• The first direct observation of atoms was in
where is the change in energy between the
Brownian motion.
initial and final orbits and is the energy of an
• Analysis of Brownian motion gave accurate sizes
absorbed or emitted photon. It is useful to plot
for atoms ( on average) and a precise
orbital energies on a vertical graph called an
value for Avogadro’s number.
energy-level diagram.
30.2Discovery of the Parts of the Atom: • Bohr proposed that the allowed orbits are circular
Electrons and Nuclei and must have quantized orbital angular
momentum given by
• Atoms are composed of negatively charged
electrons, first proved to exist in cathode-ray-tube
experiments, and a positively charged nucleus. where is the angular momentum, is the
• All electrons are identical and have a charge-to- radius of the orbit, and is Planck’s constant.
mass ratio of For all one-electron (hydrogen-like) atoms, the
radius of an orbit is given by
• The positive charge in the nuclei is carried by
particles called protons, which have a charge-to-
is the atomic number of an element (the
mass ratio of
number of electrons is has when neutral) and is
defined to be the Bohr radius, which is
• Mass of electron,
• Furthermore, the energies of hydrogen-like atoms
• Mass of proton,
are given by
• The planetary model of the atom pictures
electrons orbiting the nucleus in the same way
where is the ground-state energy and is given
that planets orbit the sun.
by
30.3Bohr’s Theory of the Hydrogen Atom
• The planetary model of the atom pictures
Thus, for hydrogen,
electrons orbiting the nucleus in the way that
planets orbit the sun. Bohr used the planetary
model to develop the first reasonable theory of
• The Bohr Theory gives accurate values for the
hydrogen, the simplest atom. Atomic and
energy levels in hydrogen-like atoms, but it has
molecular spectra are quantized, with hydrogen
been improved upon in several respects.
spectrum wavelengths given by the formula
30.4X Rays: Atomic Origins and
Applications
where is the wavelength of the emitted EM • X rays are relatively high-frequency EM radiation.
radiation and is the Rydberg constant, which has They are produced by transitions between inner-
the value shell electron levels, which produce x rays
characteristic of the atomic element, or by
• The constants and are positive integers, and decelerating electrons.
PAGE: 1390
1372 30 • Section Summary
• X rays have many uses, including medical 30.7Patterns in Spectra Reveal More
diagnostics and x-ray diffraction. Quantization
30.5Applications of Atomic Excitations and • The Zeeman effect—the splitting of lines when a
De-Excitations magnetic field is applied—is caused by other
quantized entities in atoms.
• An important atomic process is fluorescence,
• Both the magnitude and direction of orbital
defined to be any process in which an atom or
angular momentum are quantized.
molecule is excited by absorbing a photon of a
• The same is true for the magnitude and direction
given energy and de-excited by emitting a photon
of the intrinsic spin of electrons.
of a lower energy.
• Some states live much longer than others and are 30.8Quantum Numbers and Rules
termed metastable.
• Quantum numbers are used to express the
• Phosphorescence is the de-excitation of a
allowed values of quantized entities. The principal
metastable state.
quantum number labels the basic states of a
• Lasers produce coherent single-wavelength EM
system and is given by
radiation by stimulated emission, in which a
metastable state is stimulated to decay.
• The magnitude of angular momentum is given by
• Lasing requires a population inversion, in which a
majority of the atoms or molecules are in their
metastable state.
where is the angular momentum quantum
30.6The Wave Nature of Matter Causes number. The direction of angular momentum is
Quantization quantized, in that its component along an axis
defined by a magnetic field, called the -axis is
• Quantization of orbital energy is caused by the given by
wave nature of matter. Allowed orbits in atoms
occur for constructive interference of electrons in
the orbit, requiring an integral number of
is the -component of the angular momentum
wavelengths to fit in an orbit’s circumference; that
and is the angular momentum projection
is,
quantum number. Similarly, the electron’s intrinsic
spin angular momentum is given by
where is the electron’s de Broglie wavelength.
• Owing to the wave nature of electrons and the
Heisenberg uncertainty principle, there are no
is defined to be the spin quantum number.
well-defined orbits; rather, there are clouds of
Finally, the direction of the electron’s spin along
probability.
the -axis is given by
• Bohr correctly proposed that the energy and radii
of the orbits of electrons in atoms are quantized,
with energy for transitions between orbits given by
where is the -component of spin angular
momentum and is the spin projection quantum
where is the change in energy between the
number. Spin projection is referred to as
initial and final orbits and is the energy of an
spin up, whereas is called spin down.
absorbed or emitted photon.
Table 30.1summarizes the atomic quantum
• It is useful to plot orbit energies on a vertical graph
numbers and their allowed values.
called an energy-level diagram.
• The allowed orbits are circular, Bohr proposed, 30.9The Pauli Exclusion Principle
and must have quantized orbital angular
• The state of a system is completely described by a
momentum given by
complete set of quantum numbers. This set is
written as .
where is the angular momentum, is the • The Pauli exclusion principle says that no two
radius of orbit , and is Planck’s constant. electrons can have the same set of quantum
numbers; that is, no two electrons can be in the
same state.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1391
30 • Conceptual Questions 1373
• This exclusion limits the number of electrons in • The maximum number of electrons that can be in a
atomic shells and subshells. Each value of subshell is .
corresponds to a shell, and each value of • The maximum number of electrons that can be in a
corresponds to a subshell. shell is .
Conceptual Questions
30.1Discovery of the Atom 11. Observers at a safe distance from an atmospheric
test of a nuclear bomb feel its heat but receive
1. Name three different types of evidence for the
none of its copious x rays. Why is air opaque to x
existence of atoms.
rays but transparent to infrared?
2. Explain why patterns observed in the periodic table
12. Lasers are used to burn and read CDs. Explain why
of the elements are evidence for the existence of
a laser that emits blue light would be capable of
atoms, and why Brownian motion is a more direct
burning and reading more information than one
type of evidence for their existence.
that emits infrared.
3. If atoms exist, why can’t we see them with visible
13. Crystal lattices can be examined with x rays but
light?
not UV. Why?
14. CT scanners do not detect details smaller than
30.2Discovery of the Parts of the Atom:
about 0.5 mm. Is this limitation due to the
Electrons and Nuclei
wavelength of x rays? Explain.
4. What two pieces of evidence allowed the first
30.5Applications of Atomic Excitations and
calculation of , the mass of the electron?
(a) The ratios and . De-Excitations
(b) The values of and .
15. How do the allowed orbits for electrons in atoms
(c) The ratio and .
differ from the allowed orbits for planets around
Justify your response.
the sun? Explain how the correspondence
5. How do the allowed orbits for electrons in atoms
principle applies here.
differ from the allowed orbits for planets around the
16. Atomic and molecular spectra are discrete. What
sun? Explain how the correspondence principle
does discrete mean, and how are discrete spectra
applies here.
related to the quantization of energy and electron
orbits in atoms and molecules?
30.3Bohr’s Theory of the Hydrogen Atom
17. Hydrogen gas can only absorb EM radiation that
6. How do the allowed orbits for electrons in atoms has an energy corresponding to a transition in the
differ from the allowed orbits for planets around the atom, just as it can only emit these discrete
sun? Explain how the correspondence principle energies. When a spectrum is taken of the solar
applies here. corona, in which a broad range of EM wavelengths
7. Explain how Bohr’s rule for the quantization of are passed through very hot hydrogen gas, the
electron orbital angular momentum differs from the absorption spectrum shows all the features of the
actual rule. emission spectrum. But when such EM radiation
8. What is a hydrogen-like atom, and how are the passes through room-temperature hydrogen gas,
energies and radii of its electron orbits related to only the Lyman series is absorbed. Explain the
those in hydrogen? difference.
18. Lasers are used to burn and read CDs. Explain why
30.4X Rays: Atomic Origins and a laser that emits blue light would be capable of
burning and reading more information than one
Applications
that emits infrared.
9. Explain why characteristic x rays are the most 19. The coating on the inside of fluorescent light tubes
energetic in the EM emission spectrum of a given absorbs ultraviolet light and subsequently emits
element. visible light. An inventor claims that he is able to
10. Why does the energy of characteristic x rays do the reverse process. Is the inventor’s claim
become increasingly greater for heavier atoms? possible?
20. What is the difference between fluorescence and
phosphorescence?
PAGE: 1392
1374 30 • Problems & Exercises
21. How can you tell that a hologram is a true three- 25. For a given value of , what are the allowed values
dimensional image and that those in 3-D movies of ?
are not? 26. For a given value of , what are the allowed values
of ? What are the allowed values of for a
30.6The Wave Nature of Matter Causes given value of ? Give an example in each case.
Quantization 27. List all the possible values of and for an
electron. Are there particles for which these
22. How is the de Broglie wavelength of electrons
values are different? The same?
related to the quantization of their orbits in atoms
and molecules?
30.9The Pauli Exclusion Principle
30.7Patterns in Spectra Reveal More 28. Identify the shell, subshell, and number of
Quantization electrons for the following: (a) . (b) . (c)
. (d) .
23. What is the Zeeman effect, and what type of
29. Which of the following are not allowed? State
quantization was discovered because of this
which rule is violated for any that are not allowed.
effect?
(a) (b) (c) (d)
30.8Quantum Numbers and Rules
24. Define the quantum numbers , and .
Problems & Exercises
30.1Discovery of the Atom 6. (a) An aspiring physicist wants to build a scale
model of a hydrogen atom for her science fair
1. Using the given charge-to-mass ratios for electrons
project. If the atom is 1.00 m in diameter, how big
and protons, and knowing the magnitudes of their
should she try to make the nucleus?
charges are equal, what is the ratio of the proton’s
(b) How easy will this be to do?
mass to the electron’s? (Note that since the charge-
to-mass ratios are given to only three-digit
30.3Bohr’s Theory of the Hydrogen Atom
accuracy, your answer may differ from the accepted
ratio in the fourth digit.) 7. By calculating its wavelength, show that the first
2. (a) Calculate the mass of a proton using the charge- line in the Lyman series is UV radiation.
to-mass ratio given for it in this chapter and its 8. Find the wavelength of the third line in the Lyman
known charge. (b) How does your result compare series, and identify the type of EM radiation.
with the proton mass given in this chapter? 9. Look up the values of the quantities in
3. If someone wanted to build a scale model of the
, and verify that the Bohr radius
atom with a nucleus 1.00 m in diameter, how far
away would the nearest electron need to be? is .
10. Verify that the ground state energy is 13.6 eV
30.2Discovery of the Parts of the Atom:
by using
Electrons and Nuclei
11. If a hydrogen atom has its electron in the
4. Rutherford found the size of the nucleus to be state, how much energy in eV is needed to ionize
about . This implied a huge density. What it?
would this density be for gold? 12. A hydrogen atom in an excited state can be ionized
5. In Millikan’s oil-drop experiment, one looks at a with less energy than when it is in its ground state.
small oil drop held motionless between two plates. What is for a hydrogen atom if 0.850 eV of
Take the voltage between the plates to be 2033 V, energy can ionize it?
and the plate separation to be 2.00 cm. The oil drop 13. Find the radius of a hydrogen atom in the
(of density ) has a diameter of state according to Bohr’s theory.
. Find the charge on the drop, in terms 14. Show that
of electron units. (Rydberg’s constant), as discussed in the text.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1393
30 • Problems & Exercises 1375
15. What is the smallest-wavelength line in the 24. The wavelength of the four Balmer series lines for
Balmer series? Is it in the visible part of the hydrogen are found to be 410.3, 434.2, 486.3,
spectrum? and 656.5 nm. What average percentage
16. Show that the entire Paschen series is in the difference is found between these wavelength
infrared part of the spectrum. To do this, you only numbers and those predicted by
need to calculate the shortest wavelength in the
? It is amazing how well a
series.
17. Do the Balmer and Lyman series overlap? To simple formula (disconnected originally from
answer this, calculate the shortest-wavelength theory) could duplicate this phenomenon.
Balmer line and the longest-wavelength Lyman
line. 30.4X Rays: Atomic Origins and
18. (a) Which line in the Balmer series is the first one
Applications
in the UV part of the spectrum?
(b) How many Balmer series lines are in the visible 25. (a) What is the shortest-wavelength x-ray
part of the spectrum? radiation that can be generated in an x-ray tube
(c) How many are in the UV? with an applied voltage of 50.0 kV? (b) Calculate
19. A wavelength of is observed in a the photon energy in eV. (c) Explain the
hydrogen spectrum for a transition that ends in relationship of the photon energy to the applied
the level. What was for the initial level of voltage.
the electron? 26. A color television tube also generates some x rays
20. A singly ionized helium ion has only one electron when its electron beam strikes the screen. What is
and is denoted . What is the ion’s radius in the the shortest wavelength of these x rays, if a
ground state compared to the Bohr radius of 30.0-kV potential is used to accelerate the
hydrogen atom? electrons? (Note that TVs have shielding to
21. A beryllium ion with a single electron (denoted prevent these x rays from exposing viewers.)
) is in an excited state with radius the same 27. An x ray tube has an applied voltage of 100 kV. (a)
as that of the ground state of hydrogen. What is the most energetic x-ray photon it can
(a) What is for the ion? produce? Express your answer in electron volts
(b) How much energy in eV is needed to ionize the and joules. (b) Find the wavelength of such an
ion from this excited state? X–ray.
22. Atoms can be ionized by thermal collisions, such 28. The maximum characteristic x-ray photon energy
as at the high temperatures found in the solar comes from the capture of a free electron into a
shell vacancy. What is this photon energy in keV
corona. One such ion is , a carbon atom with
for tungsten, assuming the free electron has no
only a single electron.
initial kinetic energy?
(a) By what factor are the energies of its hydrogen-
29. What are the approximate energies of the and
like levels greater than those of hydrogen?
x rays for copper?
(b) What is the wavelength of the first line in this
ion’s Paschen series?
(c) What type of EM radiation is this? 30.5Applications of Atomic Excitations and
De-Excitations
23. Verify Equations and
30. Figure 30.37shows the energy-level diagram for
using the
neon. (a) Verify that the energy of the photon
approach stated in the text. That is, equate the emitted when neon goes from its metastable state
Coulomb and centripetal forces and then insert an to the one immediately below is equal to 1.96 eV.
expression for velocity from the condition for (b) Show that the wavelength of this radiation is
angular momentum quantization. 633 nm. (c) What wavelength is emitted when the
neon makes a direct transition to its ground state?
31. A helium-neon laser is pumped by electric
discharge. What wavelength electromagnetic
radiation would be needed to pump it? SeeFigure
30.37for energy-level information.
PAGE: 1394
1376 30 • Problems & Exercises
32. Ruby lasers have chromium atoms doped in an 36. An atom has an electron with . What is the
aluminum oxide crystal. The energy level diagram smallest value of for this electron?
for chromium in a ruby is shown inFigure 30.59. 37. What are the possible values of for an electron
What wavelength is emitted by a ruby laser? in the state?
38. What, if any, constraints does a value of
place on the other quantum numbers for an
electron in an atom?
39. (a) Calculate the magnitude of the angular
momentum for an electron. (b) Compare
your answer to the value Bohr proposed for the
state.
40. (a) What is the magnitude of the angular
momentum for an electron? (b) Calculate
the magnitude of the electron’s spin angular
momentum. (c) What is the ratio of these angular
momenta?
41. Repeat the previous exercise for .
FIGURE30.59Chromium atoms in an aluminum oxide
42. (a) How many angles can make with the -axis
crystal have these energy levels, one of which is metastable.
This is the basis of a ruby laser. Visible light can pump the for an electron? (b) Calculate the value of
atom into an excited state above the metastable state to the smallest angle.
achieve a population inversion.
43. What angles can the spin of an electron make
33. (a) What energy photons can pump chromium with the -axis?
atoms in a ruby laser from the ground state to its
second and third excited states? (b) What are the 30.9The Pauli Exclusion Principle
wavelengths of these photons? Verify that they are
44. (a) How many electrons can be in the shell?
in the visible part of the spectrum.
(b) What are its subshells, and how many
34. Some of the most powerful lasers are based on
electrons can be in each?
the energy levels of neodymium in solids, such as
45. (a) What is the minimum value of 1 for a subshell
glass, as shown inFigure 30.60. (a) What average
that has 11 electrons in it?
wavelength light can pump the neodymium into
(b) If this subshell is in the shell, what is the
the levels above its metastable state? (b) Verify
spectroscopic notation for this atom?
that the 1.17 eV transition produces
46. (a) If one subshell of an atom has 9 electrons in it,
radiation.
what is the minimum value of ? (b) What is the
spectroscopic notation for this atom, if this
subshell is part of the shell?
47. (a) List all possible sets of quantum numbers
for the shell, and determine
the number of electrons that can be in the shell
and each of its subshells.
(b) Show that the number of electrons in the shell
equals and that the number in each subshell
is .
48. Which of the following spectroscopic notations are
not allowed? (a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
FIGURE30.60Neodymium atoms in glass have these . State which rule is violated for each that is
energy levels, one of which is metastable. The group of
not allowed.
levels above the metastable state is convenient for achieving
a population inversion, since photons of many different 49. Which of the following spectroscopic notations are
energies can be absorbed by atoms in the ground state. allowed (that is, which violate none of the rules
regarding values of quantum numbers)? (a) (b)
30.8Quantum Numbers and Rules (c) (d) (e)
35. If an atom has an electron in the state with
, what are the possible values of ?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1395
30 • Problems & Exercises 1377
50. (a) Using the Pauli exclusion principle and the 58. Integrated Concepts
rules relating the allowed values of the quantum In a laboratory experiment designed to duplicate
numbers , prove that the maximum Thomson’s determination of , a beam of
number of electrons in a subshell is . electrons having a velocity of
(b) In a similar manner, prove that the maximum enters a magnetic field. The beam
number of electrons in a shell is 2n2. moves perpendicular to the field in a path having a
51. Integrated Concepts 6.80-cm radius of curvature. Determine
Estimate the density of a nucleus by calculating from these observations, and compare the result
the density of a proton, taking it to be a sphere 1.2 with the known value.
fm in diameter. Compare your result with the value 59. Integrated Concepts
estimated in this chapter. Find the value of , the orbital angular momentum
52. Integrated Concepts quantum number, for the moon around the earth.
The electric and magnetic forces on an electron in The extremely large value obtained implies that it
the CRT inFigure 30.7are supposed to be in is impossible to tell the difference between
opposite directions. Verify this by determining the adjacent quantized orbits for macroscopic objects.
direction of each force for the situation shown. 60. Integrated Concepts
Explain how you obtain the directions (that is, Particles called muons exist in cosmic rays and
identify the rules used). can be created in particle accelerators. Muons are
53. (a) What is the distance between the slits of a very similar to electrons, having the same charge
diffraction grating that produces a first-order and spin, but they have a mass 207 times greater.
maximum for the first Balmer line at an angle of When muons are captured by an atom, they orbit
? just like an electron but with a smaller radius,
(b) At what angle will the fourth line of the Balmer since the mass in
series appear in first order?
is 207 .
(c) At what angle will the second-order maximum
be for the first line? (a) Calculate the radius of the orbit for a
54. Integrated Concepts muon in a uranium ion ( ).
A galaxy moving away from the earth has a speed (b) Compare this with the 7.5-fm radius of a
of . What wavelength do we observe for an uranium nucleus. Note that since the muon orbits
to transition for hydrogen in that inside the electron, it falls into a hydrogen-like
galaxy? orbit. Since your answer is less than the radius of
55. Integrated Concepts the nucleus, you can see that the photons emitted
Calculate the velocity of a star moving relative to as the muon falls into its lowest orbit can give
the earth if you observe a wavelength of 91.0 nm information about the nucleus.
for ionized hydrogen capturing an electron directly 61. Integrated Concepts
into the lowest orbital (that is, a to , Calculate the minimum amount of energy in joules
or a Lyman series transition). needed to create a population inversion in a
56. Integrated Concepts helium-neon laser containing moles
In a Millikan oil-drop experiment using a setup like of neon.
that inFigure 30.9, a 500-V potential difference is 62. Integrated Concepts
applied to plates separated by 2.50 cm. (a) What A carbon dioxide laser used in surgery emits
is the mass of an oil drop having two extra infrared radiation with a wavelength of .
electrons that is suspended motionless by the In 1.00 ms, this laser raised the temperature of
field between the plates? (b) What is the diameter of flesh to and evaporated it.
of the drop, assuming it is a sphere with the (a) How many photons were required? You may
density of olive oil? assume flesh has the same heat of vaporization as
57. Integrated Concepts water. (b) What was the minimum power output
What double-slit separation would produce a first- during the flash?
order maximum at for 25.0-keV x rays? The
small answer indicates that the wave character of
x rays is best determined by having them interact
with very small objects such as atoms and
molecules.
PAGE: 1396
1378 30 • Problems & Exercises
63. Integrated Concepts 68. Unreasonable Results
Suppose an MRI scanner uses 100-MHz radio (a) What voltage must be applied to an X-ray tube
waves. to obtain 0.0100-fm-wavelength X-rays for use in
(a) Calculate the photon energy. exploring the details of nuclei? (b) What is
(b) How does this compare to typical molecular unreasonable about this result? (c) Which
binding energies? assumptions are unreasonable or inconsistent?
64. Integrated Concepts 69. Unreasonable Results
(a) An excimer laser used for vision correction A student in a physics laboratory observes a
emits 193-nm UV. Calculate the photon energy in hydrogen spectrum with a diffraction grating for
eV. the purpose of measuring the wavelengths of the
(b) These photons are used to evaporate corneal emitted radiation. In the spectrum, she observes a
tissue, which is very similar to water in its yellow line and finds its wavelength to be 589 nm.
properties. Calculate the amount of energy (a) Assuming this is part of the Balmer series,
needed per molecule of water to make the phase determine , the principal quantum number of
change from liquid to gas. That is, divide the heat the initial state. (b) What is unreasonable about
of vaporization in kJ/kg by the number of water this result? (c) Which assumptions are
molecules in a kilogram. unreasonable or inconsistent?
(c) Convert this to eV and compare to the photon 70. Construct Your Own Problem
energy. Discuss the implications. The solar corona is so hot that most atoms in it are
65. Integrated Concepts ionized. Consider a hydrogen-like atom in the
A neighboring galaxy rotates on its axis so that corona that has only a single electron. Construct a
stars on one side move toward us as fast as 200 problem in which you calculate selected spectral
km/s, while those on the other side move away as energies and wavelengths of the Lyman, Balmer,
fast as 200 km/s. This causes the EM radiation we or other series of this atom that could be used to
receive to be Doppler shifted by velocities over the identify its presence in a very hot gas. You will
entire range of ±200 km/s. What range of need to choose the atomic number of the atom,
wavelengths will we observe for the 656.0-nm line identify the element, and choose which spectral
in the Balmer series of hydrogen emitted by stars lines to consider.
in this galaxy. (This is called line broadening.) 71. Construct Your Own Problem
66. Integrated Concepts Consider the Doppler-shifted hydrogen spectrum
A pulsar is a rapidly spinning remnant of a received from a rapidly receding galaxy. Construct
supernova. It rotates on its axis, sweeping a problem in which you calculate the energies of
hydrogen along with it so that hydrogen on one selected spectral lines in the Balmer series and
side moves toward us as fast as 50.0 km/s, while examine whether they can be described with a
that on the other side moves away as fast as 50.0 formula like that in the equation
km/s. This means that the EM radiation we receive
, but with a different constant
will be Doppler shifted over a range of
. What range of wavelengths will we .
observe for the 91.20-nm line in the Lyman series 72. Critical Thinking(a) For carbon, calculate the
of hydrogen? (Such line broadening is observed energy when an electron falls from to ,
and actually provides part of the evidence for then from to . Then add these for the
rapid rotation.) total energy released in the process. (b) Calculate
67. Integrated Concepts the energy released when the electron falls
Prove that the velocity of charged particles moving directly from to . (c) Are the energies
along a straight path through perpendicular in part a and in part b the same?
electric and magnetic fields is . Thus
crossed electric and magnetic fields can be used
as a velocity selector independent of the charge
and mass of the particle involved.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1397
CHAPTER 31
Radioactivity and Nuclear Physics
FIGURE31.1The synchrotron source produces electromagnetic radiation, as evident from the visible glow. (credit: United States
Department of Energy, via Wikimedia Commons)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
31.1Nuclear Radioactivity
31.2Radiation Detection and Detectors
31.3Substructure of the Nucleus
31.4Nuclear Decay and Conservation Laws
31.5Half-Life and Activity
31.6Binding Energy
31.7Tunneling
INTRODUCTION TO RADIOACTIVITY AND NUCLEAR PHYSICS There is an ongoing quest to find substructures of
matter. At one time, it was thought that atoms would be the ultimate substructure, but just when the first direct
evidence of atoms was obtained, it became clear that they have a substructure and a tinynucleus. The nucleus itself
has spectacular characteristics. For example, certain nuclei are unstable, and their decay emits radiations with
energies millions of times greater than atomic energies. Some of the mysteries of nature, such as why the core of the
earth remains molten and how the sun produces its energy, are explained by nuclear phenomena. The exploration of
radioactivityand the nucleus revealed fundamental and previously unknown particles, forces, and conservation
laws. That exploration has evolved into a search for further underlying structures, such as quarks. In this chapter,
the fundamentals of nuclear radioactivity and the nucleus are explored. The following two chapters explore the
more important applications of nuclear physics in the field of medicine. We will also explore the basics of what we
know about quarks and other substructures smaller than nuclei.
PAGE: 1398
1380 31 • Radioactivity and Nuclear Physics
31.1 Nuclear Radioactivity
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain nuclear radiation.
• Explain the types of radiation—alpha emission, beta emission, and gamma emission.
• Explain the ionization of radiation in an atom.
• Define the range of radiation.
The discovery and study of nuclear radioactivity quickly revealed evidence of revolutionary new physics. In addition,
uses for nuclear radiation also emerged quickly—for example, people such as Ernest Rutherford used it to determine
the size of the nucleus and devices were painted with radon-doped paint to make them glow in the dark (seeFigure
31.2). We therefore begin our study of nuclear physics with the discovery and basic features of nuclear radioactivity.
FIGURE31.2The dials of this World War II aircraft glow in the dark, because they are painted with radium-doped phosphorescent paint. It
is a poignant reminder of the dual nature of radiation. Although radium paint dials are conveniently visible day and night, they emit radon, a
radioactive gas that is hazardous and is not directly sensed. (credit: U.S. Air Force Photo)
Discovery of Nuclear Radioactivity
In 1896, the French physicist Antoine Henri Becquerel (1852–1908) accidentally found that a uranium-rich mineral
called pitchblende emits invisible, penetrating rays that can darken a photographic plate enclosed in an opaque
envelope. The rays therefore carry energy; but amazingly, the pitchblende emits them continuously without any
energy input. This is an apparent violation of the law of conservation of energy, one that we now understand is due
to the conversion of a small amount of mass into energy, as related in Einstein’s famous equation . It was
soon evident that Becquerel’s rays originate in the nuclei of the atoms and have other unique characteristics. The
emission of these rays is callednuclear radioactivityor simplyradioactivity. The rays themselves are called
nuclear radiation. A nucleus that spontaneously destroys part of its mass to emit radiation is said todecay(a term
also used to describe the emission of radiation by atoms in excited states). A substance or object that emits nuclear
radiation is said to beradioactive.
Two types of experimental evidence imply that Becquerel’s rays originate deep in the heart (or nucleus) of an atom.
First, the radiation is found to be associated with certain elements, such as uranium. Radiation does not vary with
chemical state—that is, uranium is radioactive whether it is in the form of an element or compound. In addition,
radiation does not vary with temperature, pressure, or ionization state of the uranium atom. Since all of these
factors affect electrons in an atom, the radiation cannot come from electron transitions, as atomic spectra do. The
huge energy emitted during each event is the second piece of evidence that the radiation cannot be atomic. Nuclear
radiation has energies of the order of per event, which is much greater than the typical atomic energies (a
few ), such as that observed in spectra and chemical reactions, and more than ten times as high as the most
energetic characteristic x rays. Becquerel did not vigorously pursue his discovery for very long. In 1898, Marie Curie
(1867–1934), then a graduate student married to the already well-known French physicist Pierre Curie
(1859–1906), began her doctoral study of Becquerel’s rays. She and her husband soon discovered two new
radioactive elements, which she namedpolonium(after her native land) andradium(because it radiates). These two
new elements filled holes in the periodic table and, further, displayed much higher levels of radioactivity per gram of
material than uranium. Over a period of four years, working under poor conditions and spending their own funds, the
Curies processed more than a ton of uranium ore to isolate a gram of radium salt. Radium became highly sought
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1399
31.1 • Nuclear Radioactivity 1381
after, because it was about two million times as radioactive as uranium. Curie’s radium salt glowed visibly from the
radiation that took its toll on them and other unaware researchers. Shortly after completing her Ph.D., both Curies
and Becquerel shared the 1903 Nobel Prize in physics for their work on radioactivity. Pierre was killed in a horse cart
accident in 1906, but Marie continued her study of radioactivity for nearly 30 more years. Awarded the 1911 Nobel
Prize in chemistry for her discovery of two new elements, she remains the only person to win Nobel Prizes in physics
and chemistry. Marie’s radioactive fingerprints on some pages of her notebooks can still expose film, and she
suffered from radiation-induced lesions. She died of leukemia likely caused by radiation, but she was active in
research almost until her death in 1934. The following year, her daughter and son-in-law, Irene and Frederic Joliot-
Curie, were awarded the Nobel Prize in chemistry for their discovery of artificially induced radiation, adding to a
remarkable family legacy.
Alpha, Beta, and Gamma
Research begun by people such as New Zealander Ernest Rutherford soon after the discovery of nuclear radiation
indicated that different types of rays are emitted. Eventually, three types were distinguished and namedalpha ,
beta , andgamma , because, like x-rays, their identities were initially unknown.Figure 31.3shows what
happens if the rays are passed through a magnetic field. The s are unaffected, while the s and s are deflected in
opposite directions, indicating the s are positive, the s negative, and the s uncharged. Rutherford used both
magnetic and electric fields to show that s have a positive charge twice the magnitude of an electron, or .
In the process, he found the s charge to mass ratio to be several thousand times smaller than the electron’s. Later
on, Rutherford collected s from a radioactive source and passed an electric discharge through them, obtaining the
spectrum of recently discovered helium gas. Among many important discoveries made by Rutherford and his
collaborators was the proof that radiation is the emission of a helium nucleus. Rutherford won the Nobel Prize in
chemistry in 1908 for his early work. He continued to make important contributions until his death in 1934.
FIGURE31.3Alpha, beta, and gamma rays are passed through a magnetic field on the way to a phosphorescent screen. The s and s
bend in opposite directions, while the s are unaffected, indicating a positive charge for s, negative for s, and neutral for s. Consistent
results are obtained with electric fields. Collection of the radiation offers further confirmation from the direct measurement of excess
charge.
Other researchers had already proved that s are negative and have the same mass and same charge-to-mass ratio
as the recently discovered electron. By 1902, it was recognized that radiation is the emission of an electron.
Although s are electrons, they do not exist in the nucleus before it decays and are not ejected atomic
electrons—the electron is created in the nucleus at the instant of decay.
Since s remain unaffected by electric and magnetic fields, it is natural to think they might be photons. Evidence for
PAGE: 1400
1382 31 • Radioactivity and Nuclear Physics
this grew, but it was not until 1914 that this was proved by Rutherford and collaborators. By scattering radiation
from a crystal and observing interference, they demonstrated that radiation is the emission of a high-energy
photon by a nucleus. In fact, radiation comes from the de-excitation of a nucleus, just as an x ray comes from the
de-excitation of an atom. The names " ray" and "x ray" identify the source of the radiation. At the same energy,
rays and x rays are otherwise identical.
Type of Radiation Range
-Particles A sheet of paper, a few cm of air, fractions of a mm of tissue
-Particles A thin aluminum plate, or tens of cm of tissue
Rays Several cm of lead or meters of concrete
TABLE31.1Properties of Nuclear Radiation
Ionization and Range
Two of the most important characteristics of , , and rays were recognized very early. All three types of nuclear
radiation produceionizationin materials, but they penetrate different distances in materials—that is, they have
differentranges. Let us examine why they have these characteristics and what are some of the consequences.
Like x rays, nuclear radiation in the form of s, s, and s has enough energy per event to ionize atoms and
molecules in any material. The energy emitted in various nuclear decays ranges from a few to more than
, while only a few are needed to produce ionization. The effects of x rays and nuclear radiation on
biological tissues and other materials, such as solid state electronics, are directly related to the ionization they
produce. All of them, for example, can damage electronics or kill cancer cells. In addition, methods for detecting x
rays and nuclear radiation are based on ionization, directly or indirectly. All of them can ionize the air between the
plates of a capacitor, for example, causing it to discharge. This is the basis of inexpensive personal radiation
monitors, such as pictured inFigure 31.4. Apart from , , and , there are other forms of nuclear radiation as well,
and these also produce ionization with similar effects. We defineionizing radiationas any form of radiation that
produces ionization whether nuclear in origin or not, since the effects and detection of the radiation are related to
ionization.
FIGURE31.4These dosimeters (literally, dose meters) are personal radiation monitors that detect the amount of radiation by the discharge
of a rechargeable internal capacitor. The amount of discharge is related to the amount of ionizing radiation encountered, a measurement of
dose. One dosimeter is shown in the charger. Its scale is read through an eyepiece on the top. (credit: L. Chang, Wikimedia Commons)
Therange of radiationis defined to be the distance it can travel through a material. Range is related to several
factors, including the energy of the radiation, the material encountered, and the type of radiation (seeFigure 31.5).
The higher theenergy, the greater the range, all other factors being the same. This makes good sense, since
radiation loses its energy in materials primarily by producing ionization in them, and each ionization of an atom or a
molecule requires energy that is removed from the radiation. The amount of ionization is, thus, directly proportional
to the energy of the particle of radiation, as is its range.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1401
31.1 • Nuclear Radioactivity 1383
FIGURE31.5The penetration or range of radiation depends on its energy, the material it encounters, and the type of radiation. (a) Greater
energy means greater range. (b) Radiation has a smaller range in materials with high electron density. (c) Alphas have the smallest range,
betas have a greater range, and gammas penetrate the farthest.
Radiation can be absorbed or shielded by materials, such as the lead aprons dentists drape on us when taking x
rays. Lead is a particularly effective shield compared with other materials, such as plastic or air. How does the range
of radiation depend onmaterial? Ionizing radiation interacts best with charged particles in a material. Since
electrons have small masses, they most readily absorb the energy of the radiation in collisions. The greater the
density of a material and, in particular, the greater the density of electrons within a material, the smaller the range of
radiation.
Collisions
Conservation of energy and momentum often results in energy transfer to a less massive object in a collision.
This was discussed in detail inWork, Energy, and Energy Resources, for example.
Differenttypesof radiation have different ranges when compared at the same energy and in the same material.
Alphas have the shortest range, betas penetrate farther, and gammas have the greatest range. This is directly
related to charge and speed of the particle or type of radiation. At a given energy, each , , or will produce the
same number of ionizations in a material (each ionization requires a certain amount of energy on average). The more
readily the particle produces ionization, the more quickly it will lose its energy. The effect ofchargeis as follows: The
has a charge of , the has a charge of , and the is uncharged. The electromagnetic force exerted by
the is thus twice as strong as that exerted by the and it is more likely to produce ionization. Although chargeless,
the does interact weakly because it is an electromagnetic wave, but it is less likely to produce ionization in any
encounter. More quantitatively, the change in momentum given to a particle in the material is , where
is the force the , , or exerts over a time . The smaller the charge, the smaller is and the smaller is the
momentum (and energy) lost. Since the speed of alphas is about 5% to 10% of the speed of light, classical (non-
relativistic) formulas apply.
Thespeedat which they travel is the other major factor affecting the range of s, s, and s. The faster they move,
the less time they spend in the vicinity of an atom or a molecule, and the less likely they are to interact. Since s
and s are particles with mass (helium nuclei and electrons, respectively), their energy is kinetic, given classically
by . The mass of the particle is thousands of times less than that of the s, so that s must travel much
faster than s to have the same energy. Since s move faster (most at relativistic speeds), they have less time to
interact than s. Gamma rays are photons, which must travel at the speed of light. They are even less likely to
interact than a , since they spend even less time near a given atom (and they have no charge). The range of s is
thus greater than the range of s.
Alpha radiation from radioactive sources has a range much less than a millimeter of biological tissues, usually not
enough to even penetrate the dead layers of our skin. On the other hand, the same radiation can penetrate a few
PAGE: 1402
1384 31 • Radioactivity and Nuclear Physics
centimeters of air, so mere distance from a source prevents radiation from reaching us. This makes radiation
relatively safe for our body compared to and radiation. Typical radiation can penetrate a few millimeters of
tissue or about a meter of air. Beta radiation is thus hazardous even when not ingested. The range of s in lead is
about a millimeter, and so it is easy to store sources in lead radiation-proof containers. Gamma rays have a much
greater range than either s or s. In fact, if a given thickness of material, like a lead brick, absorbs 90% of the s,
then a second lead brick will only absorb 90% of what got through the first. Thus, s do not have a well-defined
range; we can only cut down the amount that gets through. Typically, s can penetrate many meters of air, go right
through our bodies, and are effectively shielded (that is, reduced in intensity to acceptable levels) by many
centimeters of lead. One benefit of s is that they can be used as radioactive tracers (seeFigure 31.6).
FIGURE31.6This image of the concentration of a radioactive tracer in a patient’s body reveals where the most active bone cells are, an
indication of bone cancer. A short-lived radioactive substance that locates itself selectively is given to the patient, and the radiation is
measured with an external detector. The emitted radiation has a sufficient range to leave the body—the range of s and s is too small
for them to be observed outside the patient. (credit: Kieran Maher, Wikimedia Commons)
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Beta Decay
Build an atom out of protons, neutrons, and electrons, and see how the element, charge, and mass change. Then
play a game to test your ideas!
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/l/21betadecayvid).
31.2 Radiation Detection and Detectors
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the working principle of a Geiger tube.
• Define and discuss radiation detectors.
It is well known that ionizing radiation affects us but does not trigger nerve impulses. Newspapers carry stories
about unsuspecting victims of radiation poisoning who fall ill with radiation sickness, such as burns and blood count
changes, but who never felt the radiation directly. This makes the detection of radiation by instruments more than
an important research tool. This section is a brief overview of radiation detection and some of its applications.
Human Application
The first direct detection of radiation was Becquerel’s fogged photographic plate. Photographic film is still the most
common detector of ionizing radiation, being used routinely in medical and dental x rays. Nuclear radiation is also
captured on film, such as seen inFigure 31.7. The mechanism for film exposure by ionizing radiation is similar to
that by photons. A quantum of energy interacts with the emulsion and alters it chemically, thus exposing the film.
The quantum come from an -particle, -particle, or photon, provided it has more than the few eV of energy needed
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1403
31.2 • Radiation Detection and Detectors 1385
to induce the chemical change (as does all ionizing radiation). The process is not 100% efficient, since not all
incident radiation interacts and not all interactions produce the chemical change. The amount of film darkening is
related to exposure, but the darkening also depends on the type of radiation, so that absorbers and other devices
must be used to obtain energy, charge, and particle-identification information.
FIGURE31.7Film badges contain film similar to that used in this dental x-ray film and is sandwiched between various absorbers to
determine the penetrating ability of the radiation as well as the amount. (credit: Werneuchen, Wikimedia Commons)
Another very commonradiation detectoris theGeiger tube. The clicking and buzzing sound we hear in
dramatizations and documentaries, as well as in our own physics labs, is usually an audio output of events detected
by a Geiger counter. These relatively inexpensive radiation detectors are based on the simple and sturdy Geiger
tube, shown schematically inFigure 31.8(b). A conducting cylinder with a wire along its axis is filled with an
insulating gas so that a voltage applied between the cylinder and wire produces almost no current. Ionizing
radiation passing through the tube produces free ion pairs (each pair consisting of one positively charged particle
and one negatively charged particle) that are attracted to the wire and cylinder, forming a current that is detected as
a count. The word count implies that there is no information on energy, charge, or type of radiation with a simple
Geiger counter. They do not detect every particle, since some radiation can pass through without producing enough
ionization to be detected. However, Geiger counters are very useful in producing a prompt output that reveals the
existence and relative intensity of ionizing radiation.
PAGE: 1404
1386 31 • Radioactivity and Nuclear Physics
FIGURE31.8(a) Geiger counters such as this one are used for prompt monitoring of radiation levels, generally giving only relative intensity
and not identifying the type or energy of the radiation. (credit: TimVickers, Wikimedia Commons) (b) Voltage applied between the cylinder
and wire in a Geiger tube causes ions and electrons produced by radiation passing through the gas-filled cylinder to move towards them.
The resulting current is detected and registered as a count.
Another radiation detection method records light produced when radiation interacts with materials. The energy of
the radiation is sufficient to excite atoms in a material that may fluoresce, such as the phosphor used by
Rutherford’s group. Materials calledscintillatorsuse a more complex collaborative process to convert radiation
energy into light. Scintillators may be liquid or solid, and they can be very efficient. Their light output can provide
information about the energy, charge, and type of radiation. Scintillator light flashes are very brief in duration,
enabling the detection of a huge number of particles in short periods of time. Scintillator detectors are used in a
variety of research and diagnostic applications. Among these are the detection by satellite-mounted equipment of
the radiation from distant galaxies, the analysis of radiation from a person indicating body burdens, and the
detection of exotic particles in accelerator laboratories.
Light from a scintillator is converted into electrical signals by devices such as thephotomultipliertube shown
schematically inFigure 31.9. These tubes are based on the photoelectric effect, which is multiplied in stages into a
cascade of electrons, hence the name photomultiplier. Light entering the photomultiplier strikes a metal plate,
ejecting an electron that is attracted by a positive potential difference to the next plate, giving it enough energy to
eject two or more electrons, and so on. The final output current can be made proportional to the energy of the light
entering the tube, which is in turn proportional to the energy deposited in the scintillator. Very sophisticated
information can be obtained with scintillators, including energy, charge, particle identification, direction of motion,
and so on.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1405
31.2 • Radiation Detection and Detectors 1387
FIGURE31.9Photomultipliers use the photoelectric effect on the photocathode to convert the light output of a scintillator into an electrical
signal. Each successive dynode has a more-positive potential than the last and attracts the ejected electrons, giving them more energy. The
number of electrons is thus multiplied at each dynode, resulting in an easily detected output current.
Solid-state radiation detectorsconvert ionization produced in a semiconductor (like those found in computer
chips) directly into an electrical signal. Semiconductors can be constructed that do not conduct current in one
particular direction. When a voltage is applied in that direction, current flows only when ionization is produced by
radiation, similar to what happens in a Geiger tube. Further, the amount of current in a solid-state detector is closely
related to the energy deposited and, since the detector is solid, it can have a high efficiency (since ionizing radiation
is stopped in a shorter distance in solids fewer particles escape detection). As with scintillators, very sophisticated
information can be obtained from solid-state detectors.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Radioactive Dating Game
Learn about different types of radiometric dating, such as carbon dating. Understand how decay and half life work to
enable radiometric dating to work. Play a game that tests your ability to match the percentage of the dating element
that remains to the age of the object.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/l/02radioactive_dating_game).
PAGE: 1406
1388 31 • Radioactivity and Nuclear Physics
31.3 Substructure of the Nucleus
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define and discuss the nucleus in an atom.
• Define atomic number.
• Define and discuss isotopes.
• Calculate the density of the nucleus.
• Explain nuclear force.
What is inside the nucleus? Why are some nuclei stable while others decay? (SeeFigure 31.10.) Why are there
different types of decay ( , and )? Why are nuclear decay energies so large? Pursuing natural questions like these
has led to far more fundamental discoveries than you might imagine.
FIGURE31.10Why is most of the carbon in this coal stable (a), while the uranium in the disk (b) slowly decays over billions of years? Why is
cesium in this ampule (c) even less stable than the uranium, decaying in far less than 1/1,000,000 the time? What is the reason uranium
and cesium undergo different types of decay ( and , respectively)? (credits: (a) Bresson Thomas, Wikimedia Commons; (b) U.S.
Department of Energy; (c) Tomihahndorf, Wikimedia Commons)
We have already identifiedprotonsas the particles that carry positive charge in the nuclei. However, there are
actuallytwotypes of particles in the nuclei—theprotonand theneutron, referred to collectively asnucleons, the
constituents of nuclei. As its name implies, theneutronis a neutral particle ( ) that has nearly the same mass
and intrinsic spin as the proton.Table 31.2compares the masses of protons, neutrons, and electrons. Note how
close the proton and neutron masses are, but the neutron is slightly more massive once you look past the third digit.
Both nucleons are much more massive than an electron. In fact, (as noted inMedical Applications of
Nuclear Physicsand .
Table 31.2also gives masses in terms of mass units that are more convenient than kilograms on the atomic and
nuclear scale. The first of these is theunifiedatomic massunit(u), defined as
31.1
This unit is defined so that a neutral carbon atom has a mass of exactly 12 u. Masses are also expressed in units
of . These units are very convenient when considering the conversion of mass into energy (and vice versa),
as is so prominent in nuclear processes. Using and units of in , we find that cancels and
comes out conveniently in MeV. For example, if the rest mass of a proton is converted entirely into energy, then
31.2
It is useful to note that 1 u of mass converted to energy produces 931.5 MeV, or
31.3
All properties of a nucleus are determined by the number of protons and neutrons it has. A specific combination of
protons and neutrons is called anuclideand is a unique nucleus. The following notation is used to represent a
particular nuclide:
31.4
where the symbols , , , and are defined as follows: Thenumber of protons in a nucleusis theatomic
number , as defined inMedical Applications of Nuclear Physics. X is thesymbol for the element, such as Ca for
calcium. However, once is known, the element is known; hence, and are redundant. For example, is
always calcium, and calcium always has . is thenumber of neutronsin a nucleus. In the notation for a
nuclide, the subscript is usually omitted. The symbol is defined as the number of nucleons or thetotal number
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1407
31.3 • Substructure of the Nucleus 1389
of protons and neutrons,
31.5
where is also called themass number. This name for is logical; the mass of an atom is nearly equal to the mass
of its nucleus, since electrons have so little mass. The mass of the nucleus turns out to be nearly equal to the sum of
the masses of the protons and neutrons in it, which is proportional to . In this context, it is particularly convenient
to express masses in units of u. Both protons and neutrons have masses close to 1 u, and so the mass of an atom is
close to u. For example, in an oxygen nucleus with eight protons and eight neutrons, , and its mass is 16 u.
As noticed, the unified atomic mass unit is defined so that a neutral carbon atom (actually a atom) has a mass
ofexactly12 . Carbon was chosen as the standard, partly because of its importance in organic chemistry (see
Appendix A).
Particle Symbol kg u MeV/c2
Proton p 1.007276 938.27
Neutron n × 1.008665 939.57
Electron e × 0.00054858 0.511
TABLE31.2Masses of the Proton, Neutron, and Electron
Let us look at a few examples of nuclides expressed in the notation. The nucleus of the simplest atom,
hydrogen, is a single proton, or (the zero for no neutrons is often omitted). To check this symbol, refer to the
periodic table—you see that the atomic number of hydrogen is 1. Since you are given that there are no neutrons,
the mass number is also 1. Suppose you are told that the helium nucleus or particle has two protons and two
neutrons. You can then see that it is written . There is a scarce form of hydrogen found in nature called
deuterium; its nucleus has one proton and one neutron and, hence, twice the mass of common hydrogen. The
symbol for deuterium is, thus, (sometimes is used, as for deuterated water ). An even rarer—and
radioactive—form of hydrogen is called tritium, since it has a single proton and two neutrons, and it is written .
These three varieties of hydrogen have nearly identical chemistries, but the nuclei differ greatly in mass, stability,
and other characteristics. Nuclei (such as those of hydrogen) having the same and different s are defined to be
isotopesof the same element.
There is some redundancy in the symbols , , , and . If the element is known, then can be found in a
periodic table and is always the same for a given element. If both and are known, then can also be
determined (first find ; then, ). Thus the simpler notation for nuclides is
31.6
which is sufficient and is most commonly used. For example, in this simpler notation, the three isotopes of hydrogen
are and while the particle is . We read this backward, saying helium-4 for , or uranium-238
for . So for , should we need to know, we can determine that for uranium from the periodic table,
and, thus, .
A variety of experiments indicate that a nucleus behaves something like a tightly packed ball of nucleons, as
illustrated inFigure 31.11. These nucleons have large kinetic energies and, thus, move rapidly in very close contact.
Nucleons can be separated by a large force, such as in a collision with another nucleus, but resist strongly being
pushed closer together. The most compelling evidence that nucleons are closely packed in a nucleus is that the
radius of a nucleus, , is found to be given approximately by
31.7
where and is the mass number of the nucleus. Note that . Since many nuclei are spherical,
and the volume of a sphere is , we see that —that is, the volume of a nucleus is proportional to
PAGE: 1408
1390 31 • Radioactivity and Nuclear Physics
the number of nucleons in it. This is what would happen if you pack nucleons so closely that there is no empty space
between them.
FIGURE31.11A model of the nucleus.
Nucleons are held together by nuclear forces and resist both being pulled apart and pushed inside one another. The
volume of the nucleus is the sum of the volumes of the nucleons in it, here shown in different colors to represent
protons and neutrons.
EXAMPLE 31.1
How Small and Dense Is a Nucleus?
(a) Find the radius of an iron-56 nucleus. (b) Find its approximate density in , approximating the mass of
to be 56 u.
Strategy and Concept
(a) Finding the radius of is a straightforward application of given . (b) To find the
approximate density, we assume the nucleus is spherical (this one actually is), calculate its volume using the radius
found in part (a), and then find its density from . Finally, we will need to convert density from units of
to .
Solution
(a) The radius of a nucleus is given by
31.8
Substituting the values for and yields
31.9
(b) Density is defined to be , which for a sphere of radius is
31.10
Substituting known values gives
31.11
Converting to units of , we find
31.12
Discussion
(a) The radius of this medium-sized nucleus is found to be approximately 4.6 fm, and so its diameter is about 10 fm,
or . In our discussion of Rutherford’s discovery of the nucleus, we noticed that it is about in
diameter (which is for lighter nuclei), consistent with this result to an order of magnitude. The nucleus is much
smaller in diameter than the typical atom, which has a diameter of the order of .
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1409
31.3 • Substructure of the Nucleus 1391
(b) The density found here is so large as to cause disbelief. It is consistent with earlier discussions we have had
about the nucleus being very small and containing nearly all of the mass of the atom. Nuclear densities, such as
found here, are about times greater than that of water, which has a density of “only” . One cubic
meter of nuclear matter, such as found in a neutron star, has the same mass as a cube of water 61 km on a side.
Nuclear Forces and Stability
What forces hold a nucleus together? The nucleus is very small and its protons, being positive, exert tremendous
repulsive forces on one another. (The Coulomb force increases as charges get closer, since it is proportional to ,
even at the tiny distances found in nuclei.) The answer is that two previously unknown forces hold the nucleus
together and make it into a tightly packed ball of nucleons. These forces are called theweak and strong nuclear
forces. Nuclear forces are so short ranged that they fall to zero strength when nucleons are separated by only a few
fm. However, like glue, they are strongly attracted when the nucleons get close to one another. The strong nuclear
force is about 100 times more attractive than the repulsive EM force, easily holding the nucleons together. Nuclear
forces become extremely repulsive if the nucleons get too close, making nucleons strongly resist being pushed
inside one another, something like ball bearings.
The fact that nuclear forces are very strong is responsible for the very large energies emitted in nuclear decay.
During decay, the forces do work, and since work is force times the distance ( ), a large force can
result in a large emitted energy. In fact, we know that there aretwodistinct nuclear forces because of the different
types of nuclear decay—the strong nuclear force is responsible for decay, while the weak nuclear force is
responsible for decay.
The many stable and unstable nuclei we have explored, and the hundreds we have not discussed, can be arranged
in a table called thechart of the nuclides, a simplified version of which is shown inFigure 31.12. Nuclides are
located on a plot of versus . Examination of a detailed chart of the nuclides reveals patterns in the
characteristics of nuclei, such as stability, abundance, and types of decay, analogous to but more complex than the
systematics in the periodic table of the elements.
FIGURE31.12Simplified chart of the nuclides, a graph of versus for known nuclides. The patterns of stable and unstable nuclides
reveal characteristics of the nuclear forces. The dashed line is for . Numbers along diagonals are mass numbers .
In principle, a nucleus can have any combination of protons and neutrons, butFigure 31.12shows a definite pattern
for those that are stable. For low-mass nuclei, there is a strong tendency for and to be nearly equal. This
means that the nuclear force is more attractive when . More detailed examination reveals greater stability
PAGE: 1410
1392 31 • Radioactivity and Nuclear Physics
when and are even numbers—nuclear forces are more attractive when neutrons and protons are in pairs. For
increasingly higher masses, there are progressively more neutrons than protons in stable nuclei. This is due to the
ever-growing repulsion between protons. Since nuclear forces are short ranged, and the Coulomb force is long
ranged, an excess of neutrons keeps the protons a little farther apart, reducing Coulomb repulsion. Decay modes of
nuclides out of the region of stability consistently produce nuclides closer to the region of stability. There are more
stable nuclei having certain numbers of protons and neutrons, calledmagic numbers. Magic numbers indicate a
shell structure for the nucleus in which closed shells are more stable. Nuclear shell theory has been very successful
in explaining nuclear energy levels, nuclear decay, and the greater stability of nuclei with closed shells. We have
been producing ever-heavier transuranic elements since the early 1940s, and we have now produced the element
with . There are theoretical predictions of an island of relative stability for nuclei with such high s.
FIGURE31.13The German-born American physicist Maria Goeppert Mayer (1906–1972) shared the 1963 Nobel Prize in physics with J.
Jensen for the creation of the nuclear shell model. This successful nuclear model has nucleons filling shells analogous to electron shells in
atoms. It was inspired by patterns observed in nuclear properties. (credit: Nobel Foundation via Wikimedia Commons)
31.4 Nuclear Decay and Conservation Laws
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define and discuss nuclear decay.
• State the conservation laws.
• Explain parent and daughter nucleus.
• Calculate the energy emitted during nuclear decay.
Nucleardecayhas provided an amazing window into the realm of the very small. Nuclear decay gave the first
indication of the connection between mass and energy, and it revealed the existence of two of the four basic forces
in nature. In this section, we explore the major modes of nuclear decay; and, like those who first explored them, we
will discover evidence of previously unknown particles and conservation laws.
Some nuclides are stable, apparently living forever. Unstable nuclides decay (that is, they are radioactive),
eventually producing a stable nuclide after many decays. We call the original nuclide theparentand its decay
products thedaughters. Some radioactive nuclides decay in a single step to a stable nucleus. For example, is
unstable and decays directly to , which is stable. Others, such as , decay to another unstable nuclide,
resulting in adecay seriesin which each subsequent nuclide decays until a stable nuclide is finally produced. The
decay series that starts from is of particular interest, since it produces the radioactive isotopes and
, which the Curies first discovered (seeFigure 31.14). Radon gas is also produced ( in the series), an
increasingly recognized naturally occurring hazard. Since radon is a noble gas, it emanates from materials, such as
soil, containing even trace amounts of and can be inhaled. The decay of radon and its daughters produces
internal damage. The decay series ends with , a stable isotope of lead.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1411
31.4 • Nuclear Decay and Conservation Laws 1393
FIGURE31.14The decay series produced by , the most common uranium isotope. Nuclides are graphed in the same manner as in the
chart of nuclides. The type of decay for each member of the series is shown, as well as the half-lives. Note that some nuclides decay by
more than one mode. You can see why radium and polonium are found in uranium ore. A stable isotope of lead is the end product of the
series.
Note that the daughters of decay shown inFigure 31.14always have two fewer protons and two fewer neutrons
than the parent. This seems reasonable, since we know that decay is the emission of a nucleus, which has
two protons and two neutrons. The daughters of decay have one less neutron and one more proton than their
parent. Beta decay is a little more subtle, as we shall see. No decays are shown in the figure, because they do not
produce a daughter that differs from the parent.
Alpha Decay
Inalpha decay, a nucleus simply breaks away from the parent nucleus, leaving a daughter with two fewer
protons and two fewer neutrons than the parent (seeFigure 31.15). One example of decay is shown inFigure
31.14for . Another nuclide that undergoes decay is .The decay equations for these two nuclides are
31.13
and
31.14
PAGE: 1412
1394 31 • Radioactivity and Nuclear Physics
FIGURE31.15Alpha decay is the separation of a nucleus from the parent. The daughter nucleus has two fewer protons and two fewer
neutrons than the parent. Alpha decay occurs spontaneously only if the daughter and nucleus have less total mass than the parent.
If you examine the periodic table of the elements, you will find that Th has , two fewer than U, which has
. Similarly, in the seconddecay equation, we see that U has two fewer protons than Pu, which has .
The general rule for decay is best written in the format . If a certain nuclide is known to decay (generally
this information must be looked up in a table of isotopes, such as inAppendix B), its decay equationis
31.15
where Y is the nuclide that has two fewer protons than X, such as Th having two fewer than U. So if you were told
that decays and were asked to write the complete decay equation, you would first look up which element
has two fewer protons (an atomic number two lower) and find that this is uranium. Then since four nucleons have
broken away from the original 239, its atomic mass would be 235.
It is instructive to examine conservation laws related to decay. You can see from the equation
that total charge is conserved. Linear and angular momentum are conserved, too.
Although conserved angular momentum is not of great consequence in this type of decay, conservation of linear
momentum has interesting consequences. If the nucleus is at rest when it decays, its momentum is zero. In that
case, the fragments must fly in opposite directions with equal-magnitude momenta so that total momentum
remains zero. This results in the particle carrying away most of the energy, as a bullet from a heavy rifle carries
away most of the energy of the powder burned to shoot it. Total mass–energy is also conserved: the energy
produced in the decay comes from conversion of a fraction of the original mass. As discussed inAtomic Physics, the
general relationship is
31.16
Here, is thenuclear reaction energy(the reaction can be nuclear decay or any other reaction), and is the
difference in mass between initial and final products. When the final products have less total mass, is positive,
and the reaction releases energy (is exothermic). When the products have greater total mass, the reaction is
endothermic ( is negative) and must be induced with an energy input. For decay to be spontaneous, the decay
products must have smaller mass than the parent.
EXAMPLE 31.2
Alpha Decay Energy Found from Nuclear Masses
Find the energy emitted in the decay of .
Strategy
Nuclear reaction energy, such as released inαdecay, can be found using the equation . We must first
find , the difference in mass between the parent nucleus and the products of the decay. This is easily done using
masses given inAppendix A.
Solution
The decay equation was given earlier for ; it is
31.17
Thus the pertinent masses are those of , , and the particle or , all of which are listed inAppendix A.
The initial mass was . The final mass is the sum
. Thus,
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1413
31.4 • Nuclear Decay and Conservation Laws 1395
31.18
Now we can find by entering into the equation:
31.19
We know , and so
31.20
Discussion
The energy released in this decay is in the range, about times as great as typical chemical reaction
energies, consistent with many previous discussions. Most of this energy becomes kinetic energy of the particle
(or nucleus), which moves away at high speed. The energy carried away by the recoil of the nucleus is
much smaller in order to conserve momentum. The nucleus can be left in an excited state to later emit
photons ( rays). This decay is spontaneous and releases energy, because the products have less mass than the
parent nucleus. The question of why the products have less mass will be discussed inBinding Energy. Note that the
masses given inAppendix Aare atomic masses of neutral atoms, including their electrons. The mass of the
electrons is the same before and after decay, and so their masses subtract out when finding . In this case,
there are 94 electrons before and after the decay.
Beta Decay
There are actuallythreetypes ofbeta decay. The first discovered was “ordinary” beta decay and is called decay
or electron emission. The symbol representsan electron emitted in nuclear beta decay. Cobalt-60 is a nuclide
that decays in the following manner:
31.21
Theneutrinois a particle emitted in beta decay that was unanticipated and is of fundamental importance. The
neutrino was not even proposed in theory until more than 20 years after beta decay was known to involve electron
emissions. Neutrinos are so difficult to detect that the first direct evidence of them was not obtained until 1953.
Neutrinos are nearly massless, have no charge, and do not interact with nucleons via the strong nuclear force.
Traveling approximately at the speed of light, they have little time to affect any nucleus they encounter. This is,
owing to the fact that they have no charge (and they are not EM waves), they do not interact through the EM force.
They do interact via the relatively weak and very short range weak nuclear force. Consequently, neutrinos escape
almost any detector and penetrate almost any shielding. However, neutrinos do carry energy, angular momentum
(they are fermions with half-integral spin), and linear momentum away from a beta decay. When accurate
measurements of beta decay were made, it became apparent that energy, angular momentum, and linear
momentum were not accounted for by the daughter nucleus and electron alone. Either a previously unsuspected
particle was carrying them away, or three conservation laws were being violated. Wolfgang Pauli made a formal
proposal for the existence of neutrinos in 1930. The Italian-born American physicist Enrico Fermi (1901–1954) gave
neutrinos their name, meaning little neutral ones, when he developed a sophisticated theory of beta decay (see
Figure 31.16). Part of Fermi’s theory was the identification of the weak nuclear force as being distinct from the
strong nuclear force and in fact responsible for beta decay. Chinese-born physicist Chien-Shiung Wu, who had
developed a number of processes critical to the Manhattan Project and related research, set out to investigate
Fermi’s theory and some experiments whose failures had cast the theory in doubt. She first identified a number of
flaws in her contemporaries’ methods and materials, and then designed an experimental method that would avoid
the same errors. Wu verified Fermi’s theory and went on to establish the core principles of beta decay, which would
become critical to further work in nuclear physics.
PAGE: 1414
1396 31 • Radioactivity and Nuclear Physics
FIGURE31.16(a) Enrico Fermi made significant contributions both as an experimentalist and a theorist. His many contributions to
theoretical physics included the identification of the weak nuclear force. The fermi (fm) is named after him, as are an entire class of
subatomic particles (fermions), an element (Fermium), and a major research laboratory (Fermilab). (credit: United States Department of
Energy, Office of Public Affairs). (b) Chien-Shiung Wu undertook the experimentation to verify Fermi’s theory of beta decay. She became the
world’s expert on the subject, and contributed to work that led to a Nobel Prize, even though she was denied the award. (credit:
Smithsonian Institute)
The neutrino also reveals a new conservation law. There are various families of particles, one of which is the
electron family. We propose that the number of members of the electron family is constant in any process or any
closed system. In our example of beta decay, there are no members of the electron family present before the decay,
but after, there is an electron and a neutrino. So electrons are given an electron family number of . The neutrino in
decay is anelectron’s antineutrino, given the symbol , where is the Greek letter nu, and the subscripte
means this neutrino is related to the electron. The bar indicates this is a particle ofantimatter. (All particles have
antimatter counterparts that are nearly identical except that they have the opposite charge. Antimatter is almost
entirely absent on Earth, but it is found in nuclear decay and other nuclear and particle reactions as well as in outer
space.) The electron’s antineutrino , being antimatter, has an electron family number of . The total is zero,
before and after the decay. The new conservation law, obeyed in all circumstances, states that thetotal electron
family number is constant. An electron cannot be created without also creating an antimatter family member. This
law is analogous to the conservation of charge in a situation where total charge is originally zero, and equal amounts
of positive and negative charge must be created in a reaction to keep the total zero.
If a nuclide is known to decay, then its decay equation is
31.22
where Y is the nuclide having one more proton than X (seeFigure 31.17). So if you know that a certain nuclide
decays, you can find the daughter nucleus by first looking up for the parent and then determining which element
has atomic number . In the example of the decay of given earlier, we see that for Co and
is Ni. It is as if one of the neutrons in the parent nucleus decays into a proton, electron, and neutrino. In
fact, neutrons outside of nuclei do just that—they live only an average of a few minutes and decay in the
following manner:
31.23
FIGURE31.17In decay, the parent nucleus emits an electron and an antineutrino. The daughter nucleus has one more proton and one
less neutron than its parent. Neutrinos interact so weakly that they are almost never directly observed, but they play a fundamental role in
particle physics.
We see that charge is conserved in decay, since the total charge is before and after the decay. For example, in
decay, total charge is 27 before decay, since cobalt has . After decay, the daughter nucleus is Ni, which
has , and there is an electron, so that the total charge is also or 27. Angular momentum is
conserved, but not obviously (you have to examine the spins and angular momenta of the final products in detail to
verify this). Linear momentum is also conserved, again imparting most of the decay energy to the electron and the
antineutrino, since they are of low and zero mass, respectively. Another new conservation law is obeyed here and
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1415
31.4 • Nuclear Decay and Conservation Laws 1397
elsewhere in nature.The total number of nucleons is conserved. In decay, for example, there are 60
nucleons before and after the decay. Note that total is also conserved in decay. Also note that the total number
of protons changes, as does the total number of neutrons, so that total and total arenotconserved in
decay, as they are in decay. Energy released in decay can be calculated given the masses of the parent and
products.
EXAMPLE 31.3
Decay Energy from Masses
Find the energy emitted in the decay of .
Strategy and Concept
As in the preceding example, we must first find , the difference in mass between the parent nucleus and the
products of the decay, using masses given inAppendix A. Then the emitted energy is calculated as before, using
. The initial mass is just that of the parent nucleus, and the final mass is that of the daughter nucleus
and the electron created in the decay. The neutrino is massless, or nearly so. However, since the masses given in
Appendix Aare for neutral atoms, the daughter nucleus has one more electron than the parent, and so the extra
electron mass that corresponds to the is included in the atomic mass of Ni. Thus,
31.24
Solution
The decay equation for is
31.25
As noticed,
31.26
Entering the masses found inAppendix Agives
31.27
Thus,
31.28
Using , we obtain
31.29
Discussion and Implications
Perhaps the most difficult thing about this example is convincing yourself that the mass is included in the atomic
mass of . Beyond that are other implications. Again the decay energy is in the MeV range. This energy is shared
by all of the products of the decay. In many decays, the daughter nucleus is left in an excited state and
emits photons ( rays). Most of the remaining energy goes to the electron and neutrino, since the recoil kinetic
energy of the daughter nucleus is small. One final note: the electron emitted in decay is created in the nucleus at
the time of decay.
The second type of beta decay is less common than the first. It is decay. Certain nuclides decay by the emission
of apositiveelectron. This isantielectronorpositron decay(seeFigure 31.18).
PAGE: 1416
1398 31 • Radioactivity and Nuclear Physics
FIGURE31.18 decay is the emission of a positron that eventually finds an electron to annihilate, characteristically producing gammas in
opposite directions.
The antielectron is often represented by the symbol , but in beta decay it is written as to indicate the
antielectron was emitted in a nuclear decay. Antielectrons are the antimatter counterpart to electrons, being nearly
identical, having the same mass, spin, and so on, but having a positive charge and an electron family number of .
When apositronencounters an electron, there is a mutual annihilation in which all the mass of the antielectron-
electron pair is converted into pure photon energy. (The reaction, , conserves electron family
number as well as all other conserved quantities.) If a nuclide is known to decay, then its decay
equationis
31.30
where Y is the nuclide having one less proton than X (to conserve charge) and is the symbol for theelectron’s
neutrino, which has an electron family number of . Since an antimatter member of the electron family (the ) is
created in the decay, a matter member of the family (here the ) must also be created. Given, for example, that
decays, you can write its full decay equation by first finding that for , so that the daughter
nuclide will have , the atomic number for neon. Thus the decay equation for is
31.31
In decay, it is as if one of the protons in the parent nucleus decays into a neutron, a positron, and a neutrino.
Protons do not do this outside of the nucleus, and so the decay is due to the complexities of the nuclear force. Note
again that the total number of nucleons is constant in this and any other reaction. To find the energy emitted in
decay, you must again count the number of electrons in the neutral atoms, since atomic masses are used. The
daughter has one less electron than the parent, and one electron mass is created in the decay. Thus, in decay,
31.32
since we use the masses of neutral atoms.
Electron captureis the third type of beta decay. Here, a nucleus captures an inner-shell electron and undergoes a
nuclear reaction that has the same effect as decay. Electron capture is sometimes denoted by the letters EC. We
know that electrons cannot reside in the nucleus, but this is a nuclear reaction that consumes the electron and
occurs spontaneously only when the products have less mass than the parent plus the electron. If a nuclide is
known to undergo electron capture, then itselectron capture equationis
31.33
Any nuclide that can decay can also undergo electron capture (and often does both). The same conservation
laws are obeyed for EC as for decay. It is good practice to confirm these for yourself.
All forms of beta decay occur because the parent nuclide is unstable and lies outside the region of stability in the
chart of nuclides. Those nuclides that have relatively more neutrons than those in the region of stability will
decay to produce a daughter with fewer neutrons, producing a daughter nearer the region of stability. Similarly,
those nuclides having relatively more protons than those in the region of stability will decay or undergo electron
capture to produce a daughter with fewer protons, nearer the region of stability.
Gamma Decay
Gamma decayis the simplest form of nuclear decay—it is the emission of energetic photons by nuclei left in an
excited state by some earlier process. Protons and neutrons in an excited nucleus are in higher orbitals, and they fall
to lower levels by photon emission (analogous to electrons in excited atoms). Nuclear excited states have lifetimes
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1417
31.5 • Half-Life and Activity 1399
typically of only about s, an indication of the great strength of the forces pulling the nucleons to lower states.
The decay equation is simply
31.34
where the asterisk indicates the nucleus is in an excited state. There may be one or more s emitted, depending on
how the nuclide de-excites. In radioactive decay, emission is common and is preceded by or decay. For
example, when decays, it most often leaves the daughter nucleus in an excited state, written . Then
the nickel nucleus quickly decays by the emission of two penetrating s:
31.35
These are called cobalt rays, although they come from nickel—they are used for cancer therapy, for example. It is
again constructive to verify the conservation laws for gamma decay. Finally, since decay does not change the
nuclide to another species, it is not prominently featured in charts of decay series, such as that inFigure 31.14.
There are other types of nuclear decay, but they occur less commonly than , , and decay. Spontaneous fission is
the most important of the other forms of nuclear decay because of its applications in nuclear power and weapons. It
is covered in the next chapter.
31.5 Half-Life and Activity
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define half-life.
• Define dating.
• Calculate age of old objects by radioactive dating.
Unstable nuclei decay. However, some nuclides decay faster than others. For example, radium and polonium,
discovered by the Curies, decay faster than uranium. This means they have shorter lifetimes, producing a greater
rate of decay. In this section we explore half-life and activity, the quantitative terms for lifetime and rate of decay.
Half-Life
Why use a term like half-life rather than lifetime? The answer can be found by examiningFigure 31.19, which shows
how the number of radioactive nuclei in a sample decreases with time. Thetime in which half of the original number
of nuclei decayis defined as thehalf-life, . Half of the remaining nuclei decay in the next half-life. Further, half of
that amount decays in the following half-life. Therefore, the number of radioactive nuclei decreases from to
in one half-life, then to in the next, and to in the next, and so on. If is a large number, thenmanyhalf-
lives (not just two) pass before all of the nuclei decay. Nuclear decay is an example of a purely statistical process. A
more precise definition of half-life is thateach nucleus has a 50% chance of living for a time equal to one half-life
. Thus, if is reasonably large, half of the original nuclei decay in a time of one half-life. If an individual nucleus
makes it through that time, it still has a 50% chance of surviving through another half-life. Even if it happens to
make it through hundreds of half-lives, it still has a 50% chance of surviving through one more. The probability of
decay is the same no matter when you start counting. This is like random coin flipping. The chance of heads is 50%,
no matter what has happened before.
PAGE: 1418
1400 31 • Radioactivity and Nuclear Physics
FIGURE31.19Radioactive decay reduces the number of radioactive nuclei over time. In one half-life , the number decreases to half of
its original value. Half of what remains decay in the next half-life, and half of those in the next, and so on. This is an exponential decay, as
seen in the graph of the number of nuclei present as a function of time.
There is a tremendous range in the half-lives of various nuclides, from as short as s for the most unstable, to
more than y for the least unstable, or about 46 orders of magnitude. Nuclides with the shortest half-lives are
those for which the nuclear forces are least attractive, an indication of the extent to which the nuclear force can
depend on the particular combination of neutrons and protons. The concept of half-life is applicable to other
subatomic particles, as will be discussed inParticle Physics. It is also applicable to the decay of excited states in
atoms and nuclei. The following equation gives the quantitative relationship between the original number of nuclei
present at time zero ( ) and the number ( ) at a later time :
31.36
where is the base of the natural logarithm, and is thedecay constantfor the nuclide. The shorter
the half-life, the larger is the value of , and the faster the exponential decreases with time. The relationship
between the decay constant and the half-life is
31.37
To see how the number of nuclei declines to half its original value in one half-life, let in the exponential in
the equation . This gives . For integral numbers of half-lives,
you can just divide the original number by 2 over and over again, rather than using the exponential relationship. For
example, if ten half-lives have passed, we divide by 2 ten times. This reduces it to . For an arbitrary time,
not just a multiple of the half-life, the exponential relationship must be used.
Radioactive datingis a clever use of naturally occurring radioactivity. Its most famous application iscarbon-14
dating. Carbon-14 has a half-life of 5730 years and is produced in a nuclear reaction induced when solar neutrinos
strike in the atmosphere. Radioactive carbon has the same chemistry as stable carbon, and so it mixes into the
ecosphere, where it is consumed and becomes part of every living organism. Carbon-14 has an abundance of 1.3
parts per trillion of normal carbon. Thus, if you know the number of carbon nuclei in an object (perhaps determined
by mass and Avogadro’s number), you multiply that number by × to find the number of nuclei in the
object. When an organism dies, carbon exchange with the environment ceases, and is not replenished as it
decays. By comparing the abundance of in an artifact, such as mummy wrappings, with the normal abundance
in living tissue, it is possible to determine the artifact’s age (or time since death). Carbon-14 dating can be used for
biological tissues as old as 50 or 60 thousand years, but is most accurate for younger samples, since the abundance
of nuclei in them is greater. Very old biological materials contain no at all. There are instances in which the
date of an artifact can be determined by other means, such as historical knowledge or tree-ring counting. These
cross-references have confirmed the validity of carbon-14 dating and permitted us to calibrate the technique as
well. Carbon-14 dating revolutionized parts of archaeology and is of such importance that it earned the 1960 Nobel
Prize in chemistry for its developer, the American chemist Willard Libby (1908–1980).
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1419
31.5 • Half-Life and Activity 1401
One of the most famous cases of carbon-14 dating involves the Shroud of Turin, a long piece of fabric purported to
be the burial shroud of Jesus (seeFigure 31.20). This relic was first displayed in Turin in 1354 and was denounced
as a fraud at that time by a French bishop. Its remarkable negative imprint of an apparently crucified body
resembles the then-accepted image of Jesus, and so the shroud was never disregarded completely and remained
controversial over the centuries. Carbon-14 dating was not performed on the shroud until 1988, when the process
had been refined to the point where only a small amount of material needed to be destroyed. Samples were tested
at three independent laboratories, each being given four pieces of cloth, with only one unidentified piece from the
shroud, to avoid prejudice. All three laboratories found samples of the shroud contain 92% of the found in living
tissues, allowing the shroud to be dated (seeExample 31.4).
FIGURE31.20Part of the Shroud of Turin, which shows a remarkable negative imprint likeness of Jesus complete with evidence of
crucifixion wounds. The shroud first surfaced in the 14th century and was only recently carbon-14 dated. It has not been determined how
the image was placed on the material. (credit: Butko, Wikimedia Commons)
EXAMPLE 31.4
How Old Is the Shroud of Turin?
Calculate the age of the Shroud of Turin given that the amount of found in it is 92% of that in living tissue.
Strategy
Knowing that 92% of the remains means that . Therefore, the equation can be used
to find . We also know that the half-life of is 5730 y, and so once is known, we can use the equation
to find and then find as requested. Here, we postulate that the decrease in is solely due to nuclear
decay.
Solution
Solving the equation for gives
31.38
Thus,
31.39
Taking the natural logarithm of both sides of the equation yields
31.40
so that
31.41
Rearranging to isolate gives
31.42
PAGE: 1420
1402 31 • Radioactivity and Nuclear Physics
Now, the equation can be used to find for . Solving for and substituting the known half-life gives
31.43
We enter this value into the previous equation to find :
31.44
Discussion
This dates the material in the shroud to 1988–690 = a.d. 1300. Our calculation is only accurate to two digits, so that
the year is rounded to 1300. The values obtained at the three independent laboratories gave a weighted average
date of a.d. . The uncertainty is typical of carbon-14 dating and is due to the small amount of in living
tissues, the amount of material available, and experimental uncertainties (reduced by having three independent
measurements). It is meaningful that the date of the shroud is consistent with the first record of its existence and
inconsistent with the period in which Jesus lived.
There are other forms of radioactive dating. Rocks, for example, can sometimes be dated based on the decay of
. The decay series for ends with , so that the ratio of these nuclides in a rock is an indication of how
long it has been since the rock solidified. The original composition of the rock, such as the absence of lead, must be
known with some confidence. However, as with carbon-14 dating, the technique can be verified by a consistent
body of knowledge. Since has a half-life of y, it is useful for dating only very old materials, showing,
for example, that the oldest rocks on Earth solidified about years ago.
Activity, the Rate of Decay
What do we mean when we say a source is highly radioactive? Generally, this means the number of decays per unit
time is very high. We defineactivity to be therate of decayexpressed in decays per unit time. In equation form,
this is
31.45
where is the number of decays that occur in time . The SI unit for activity is one decay per second and is
given the namebecquerel(Bq) in honor of the discoverer of radioactivity. That is,
31.46
Activity is often expressed in other units, such as decays per minute or decays per year. One of the most common
units for activity is thecurie(Ci), defined to be the activity of 1 g of , in honor of Marie Curie’s work with
radium. The definition of curie is
31.47
or decays per second. A curie is a large unit of activity, while a becquerel is a relatively small unit.
. In countries like Australia and New Zealand that adhere more to SI units, most
radioactive sources, such as those used in medical diagnostics or in physics laboratories, are labeled in Bq or
megabecquerel (MBq).
Intuitively, you would expect the activity of a source to depend on two things: the amount of the radioactive
substance present, and its half-life. The greater the number of radioactive nuclei present in the sample, the more
will decay per unit of time. The shorter the half-life, the more decays per unit time, for a given number of nuclei. So
activity should be proportional to the number of radioactive nuclei, , and inversely proportional to their half-life,
. In fact, your intuition is correct. It can be shown that the activity of a source is
31.48
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1421
31.5 • Half-Life and Activity 1403
where is the number of radioactive nuclei present, having half-life . This relationship is useful in a variety of
calculations, as the next two examples illustrate.
EXAMPLE 31.5
How Great Is the Activity in Living Tissue?
Calculate the activity due to in 1.00 kg of carbon found in a living organism. Express the activity in units of Bq
and Ci.
Strategy
To find the activity using the equation , we must know and . The half-life of can be found in
Appendix B, and was stated above as 5730 y. To find , we first find the number of nuclei in 1.00 kg of carbon
using the concept of a mole. As indicated, we then multiply by × (the abundance of in a carbon
sample from a living organism) to get the number of nuclei in a living organism.
Solution
One mole of carbon has a mass of 12.0 g, since it is nearly pure . (A mole has a mass in grams equal in
magnitude to found in the periodic table.) Thus the number of carbon nuclei in a kilogram is
31.49
So the number of nuclei in 1 kg of carbon is
31.50
Now the activity is found using the equation .
Entering known values gives
×
× 31.51
or decays per year. To convert this to the unit Bq, we simply convert years to seconds. Thus,
×
31.52
×
or 250 decays per second. To express in curies, we use the definition of a curie,
×
31.53
×
Thus,
31.54
Discussion
Our own bodies contain kilograms of carbon, and it is intriguing to think there are hundreds of decays per
second taking place in us. Carbon-14 and other naturally occurring radioactive substances in our bodies contribute
to the background radiation we receive. The small number of decays per second found for a kilogram of carbon in
this example gives you some idea of how difficult it is to detect in a small sample of material. If there are 250
decays per second in a kilogram, then there are 0.25 decays per second in a gram of carbon in living tissue. To
observe this, you must be able to distinguish decays from other forms of radiation, in order to reduce background
noise. This becomes more difficult with an old tissue sample, since it contains less , and for samples more than
PAGE: 1422
1404 31 • Radioactivity and Nuclear Physics
50 thousand years old, it is impossible.
Human-made (or artificial) radioactivity has been produced for decades and has many uses. Some of these include
medical therapy for cancer, medical imaging and diagnostics, and food preservation by irradiation. Many
applications as well as the biological effects of radiation are explored inMedical Applications of Nuclear Physics, but
it is clear that radiation is hazardous. A number of tragic examples of this exist, one of the most disastrous being the
meltdown and fire at the Chernobyl reactor complex in the Ukraine (seeFigure 31.21). Several radioactive isotopes
were released in huge quantities, contaminating many thousands of square kilometers and directly affecting
hundreds of thousands of people. The most significant releases were of , , , , , and .
Estimates are that the total amount of radiation released was about 100 million curies.
Human and Medical Applications
FIGURE31.21The Chernobyl reactor. More than 100 people died soon after its meltdown, and there will be thousands of deaths from
radiation-induced cancer in the future. While the accident was due to a series of human errors, the cleanup efforts were heroic. Most of the
immediate fatalities were firefighters and reactor personnel. (credit: Elena Filatova)
EXAMPLE 31.6
What Mass of Escaped Chernobyl?
It is estimated that the Chernobyl disaster released 6.0 MCi of into the environment. Calculate the mass of
released.
Strategy
We can calculate the mass released using Avogadro’s number and the concept of a mole if we can first find the
number of nuclei released. Since the activity is given, and the half-life of is found inAppendix Bto be
30.2 y, we can use the equation to find .
Solution
Solving the equation for gives
31.55
Entering the given values yields
31.56
Converting curies to becquerels and years to seconds, we get
× × ×
31.57
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1423
31.6 • Binding Energy 1405
One mole of a nuclide has a mass of grams, so that one mole of has a mass of 137 g. A mole has
nuclei. Thus the mass of released was
31.58
Discussion
While 70 kg of material may not be a very large mass compared to the amount of fuel in a power plant, it is
extremely radioactive, since it only has a 30-year half-life. Six megacuries (6.0 MCi) is an extraordinary amount of
activity but is only a fraction of what is produced in nuclear reactors. Similar amounts of the other isotopes were
also released at Chernobyl. Although the chances of such a disaster may have seemed small, the consequences
were extremely severe, requiring greater caution than was used. More will be said about safe reactor design in the
next chapter, but it should be noted that more recent reactors have a fundamentally safer design.
Activity decreases in time, going to half its original value in one half-life, then to one-fourth its original value in the
next half-life, and so on. Since , the activity decreases as the number of radioactive nuclei decreases.
The equation for as a function of time is found by combining the equations and ,
yielding
31.59
where is the activity at . This equation shows exponential decay of radioactive nuclei. For example, if a
source originally has a 1.00-mCi activity, it declines to 0.500 mCi in one half-life, to 0.250 mCi in two half-lives, to
0.125 mCi in three half-lives, and so on. For times other than whole half-lives, the equation must be
used to find .
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Alpha Decay
Watch alpha particles escape from a polonium nucleus, causing radioactive alpha decay. See how random decay
times relate to the half life.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/l/02alphadecay).
31.6 Binding Energy
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define and discuss binding energy.
• Calculate the binding energy per nucleon of a particle.
The more tightly bound a system is, the stronger the forces that hold it together and the greater the energy required
to pull it apart. We can therefore learn about nuclear forces by examining how tightly bound the nuclei are. We
define thebinding energy(BE) of a nucleus to bethe energy required to completely disassemble it into separate
protons and neutrons. We can determine the BE of a nucleus from its rest mass. The two are connected through
Einstein’s famous relationship . A bound system has asmallermass than its separate constituents; the
more tightly the nucleons are bound together, the smaller the mass of the nucleus.
Imagine pulling a nuclide apart as illustrated inFigure 31.22. Work done to overcome the nuclear forces holding the
nucleus together puts energy into the system. By definition, the energy input equals the binding energy BE. The
pieces are at rest when separated, and so the energy put into them increases their total rest mass compared with
what it was when they were glued together as a nucleus. That mass increase is thus . This difference in
PAGE: 1424
1406 31 • Radioactivity and Nuclear Physics
mass is known asmass defect. It implies that the mass of the nucleus is less than the sum of the masses of its
constituent protons and neutrons. A nuclide has protons and neutrons, so that the difference in mass is
31.60
Thus,
31.61
where is the mass of the nuclide , is the mass of a proton, and is the mass of a neutron. Traditionally,
we deal with the masses of neutral atoms. To get atomic masses into the last equation, we first add electrons to
, which gives , the atomic mass of the nuclide. We then add electrons to the protons, which gives
, or times the mass of a hydrogen atom. Thus the binding energy of a nuclide is
31.62
The atomic masses can be found inAppendix A, most conveniently expressed in unified atomic mass units u
( ). BE is thus calculated from known atomic masses.
FIGURE31.22Work done to pull a nucleus apart into its constituent protons and neutrons increases the mass of the system. The work to
disassemble the nucleus equals its binding energy BE. A bound system has less mass than the sum of its parts, especially noticeable in the
nuclei, where forces and energies are very large.
Things Great and Small
Nuclear Decay Helps Explain Earth’s Hot Interior
A puzzle created by radioactive dating of rocks is resolved by radioactive heating of Earth’s interior. This
intriguing story is another example of how small-scale physics can explain large-scale phenomena.
Radioactive dating plays a role in determining the approximate age of the Earth. The oldest rocks on Earth
solidified about years ago—a number determined by uranium-238 dating. These rocks could only have
solidified once the surface of the Earth had cooled sufficiently. The temperature of the Earth at formation can be
estimated based on gravitational potential energy of the assemblage of pieces being converted to thermal
energy. Using heat transfer concepts discussed inThermodynamicsit is then possible to calculate how long it
would take for the surface to cool to rock-formation temperatures. The result is about years. The first rocks
formed have been solid for years, so that the age of the Earth is approximately years. There
is a large body of other types of evidence (both Earth-bound and solar system characteristics are used) that
supports this age. The puzzle is that, given its age and initial temperature, the center of the Earth should be
much cooler than it is today (seeFigure 31.23).
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1425
31.6 • Binding Energy 1407
FIGURE31.23The center of the Earth cools by well-known heat transfer methods. Convection in the liquid regions and conduction
move thermal energy to the surface, where it radiates into cold, dark space. Given the age of the Earth and its initial temperature, it
should have cooled to a lower temperature by now. The blowup shows that nuclear decay releases energy in the Earth’s interior. This
energy has slowed the cooling process and is responsible for the interior still being molten.
Danish geophysicist Inge Lehmann was the first to properly interpret seismological data from earthquakes as
evidence that the Earth had a solid inner core surrounded by a liquid outer core. Shear or transverse waves
cannot travel through a liquid and are not transmitted through the Earth’s core. Yet compression or longitudinal
waves can pass through a liquid and do go through the core. From this information, the temperature of the
interior can be estimated. As noticed, the interior should have cooled more from its initial temperature in the
years since its formation. In fact, it should have taken no more than about years to cool to its
present temperature. What is keeping it hot? The answer seems to be radioactive decay of primordial elements
that were part of the material that formed the Earth (see the blowup inFigure 31.23).
Nuclides such as and have half-lives similar to or longer than the age of the Earth, and their decay still
contributes energy to the interior. Some of the primordial radioactive nuclides have unstable decay products that
also release energy— has a long decay chain of these. Further, there were more of these primordial
radioactive nuclides early in the life of the Earth, and thus the activity and energy contributed were greater then
(perhaps by an order of magnitude). The amount of power created by these decays per cubic meter is very small.
However, since a huge volume of material lies deep below the surface, this relatively small amount of energy
cannot escape quickly. The power produced near the surface has much less distance to go to escape and has a
negligible effect on surface temperatures.
A final effect of this trapped radiation merits mention. Alpha decay produces helium nuclei, which form helium
atoms when they are stopped and capture electrons. Most of the helium on Earth is obtained from wells and is
produced in this manner. Any helium in the atmosphere will escape in geologically short times because of its
high thermal velocity.
What patterns and insights are gained from an examination of the binding energy of various nuclides? First, we find
that BE is approximately proportional to the number of nucleons in any nucleus. About twice as much energy is
needed to pull apart a nucleus like compared with pulling apart , for example. To help us look at other
effects, we divide BE by and consider thebinding energy per nucleon, . The graph of inFigure 31.24
reveals some very interesting aspects of nuclei. We see that the binding energy per nucleon averages about 8 MeV,
but is lower for both the lightest and heaviest nuclei. This overall trend, in which nuclei with equal to about 60
have the greatest and are thus the most tightly bound, is due to the combined characteristics of the attractive
nuclear forces and the repulsive Coulomb force. It is especially important to note two things—the strong nuclear
force is about 100 times stronger than the Coulomb force,andthe nuclear forces are shorter in range compared to
the Coulomb force. So, for low-mass nuclei, the nuclear attraction dominates and each added nucleon forms bonds
with all others, causing progressively heavier nuclei to have progressively greater values of . This continues up
to , roughly corresponding to the mass number of iron. Beyond that, new nucleons added to a nucleus will be
too far from some others to feel their nuclear attraction. Added protons, however, feel the repulsion of all other
protons, since the Coulomb force is longer in range. Coulomb repulsion grows for progressively heavier nuclei, but
PAGE: 1426
1408 31 • Radioactivity and Nuclear Physics
nuclear attraction remains about the same, and so becomes smaller. This is why stable nuclei heavier than
have more neutrons than protons. Coulomb repulsion is reduced by having more neutrons to keep the
protons farther apart (seeFigure 31.25).
FIGURE31.24A graph of average binding energy per nucleon, , for stable nuclei. The most tightly bound nuclei are those with near
60, where the attractive nuclear force has its greatest effect. At higher s, the Coulomb repulsion progressively reduces the binding energy
per nucleon, because the nuclear force is short ranged. The spikes on the curve are very tightly bound nuclides and indicate shell closures.
FIGURE31.25The nuclear force is attractive and stronger than the Coulomb force, but it is short ranged. In low-mass nuclei, each nucleon
feels the nuclear attraction of all others. In larger nuclei, the range of the nuclear force, shown for a single nucleon, is smaller than the size
of the nucleus, but the Coulomb repulsion from all protons reaches all others. If the nucleus is large enough, the Coulomb repulsion can
add to overcome the nuclear attraction.
There are some noticeable spikes on the graph, which represent particularly tightly bound nuclei. These
spikes reveal further details of nuclear forces, such as confirming that closed-shell nuclei (those with magic
numbers of protons or neutrons or both) are more tightly bound. The spikes also indicate that some nuclei with even
numbers for and , and with , are exceptionally tightly bound. This finding can be correlated with some of
the cosmic abundances of the elements. The most common elements in the universe, as determined by
observations of atomic spectra from outer space, are hydrogen, followed by , with much smaller amounts of
and other elements. It should be noted that the heavier elements are created in supernova explosions, while
the lighter ones are produced by nuclear fusion during the normal life cycles of stars, as will be discussed in
subsequent chapters. The most common elements have the most tightly bound nuclei. It is also no accident that
one of the most tightly bound light nuclei is , emitted in decay.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1427
31.6 • Binding Energy 1409
EXAMPLE 31.7
What Is for an Alpha Particle?
Calculate the binding energy per nucleon of , the particle.
Strategy
To find , we first find BE using the Equation and then divide by . This is
straightforward once we have looked up the appropriate atomic masses inAppendix A.
Solution
The binding energy for a nucleus is given by the equation
31.63
For , we have ; thus,
31.64
Appendix Agives these masses as , , and . Thus,
31.65
Noting that , we find
31.66
Since , we see that is this number divided by 4, or
31.67
Discussion
This is a large binding energy per nucleon compared with those for other low-mass nuclei, which have
. This indicates that is tightly bound compared with its neighbors on the chart of the
nuclides. You can see the spike representing this value of for on the graph inFigure 31.24. This is why
is stable. Since is tightly bound, it has less mass than other nuclei and, therefore, cannot
spontaneously decay into them. The large binding energy also helps to explain why some nuclei undergo decay.
Smaller mass in the decay products can mean energy release, and such decays can be spontaneous. Further, it can
happen that two protons and two neutrons in a nucleus can randomly find themselves together, experience the
exceptionally large nuclear force that binds this combination, and act as a unit within the nucleus, at least for a
while. In some cases, the escapes, and decay has then taken place.
There is more to be learned from nuclear binding energies. The general trend in is fundamental to energy
production in stars, and to fusion and fission energy sources on Earth, for example. This is one of the applications of
nuclear physics covered inMedical Applications of Nuclear Physics. The abundance of elements on Earth, in stars,
and in the universe as a whole is related to the binding energy of nuclei and has implications for the continued
expansion of the universe.
Problem-Solving Strategies
For Reaction And Binding Energies and Activity Calculations in Nuclear Physics
1. Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem (identify the unknowns). This will allow you to
decide whether the energy of a decay or nuclear reaction is involved, for example, or whether the problem is
primarily concerned with activity (rate of decay).
2. Make a list of what is given or can be inferred from the problem as stated (identify the knowns).
3. For reaction and binding-energy problems, we use atomic rather than nuclear masses.Since the masses of
neutral atoms are used, you must count the number of electrons involved. If these do not balance (such as in
decay), then an energy adjustment of 0.511 MeV per electron must be made. Also note that atomic masses
PAGE: 1428
1410 31 • Radioactivity and Nuclear Physics
may not be given in a problem; they can be found in tables.
4. For problems involving activity, the relationship of activity to half-life, and the number of nuclei given in the
equation can be very useful.Owing to the fact that number of nuclei is involved, you will also need
to be familiar with moles and Avogadro’s number.
5. Perform the desired calculation; keep careful track of plus and minus signs as well as powers of 10.
6. Check the answer to see if it is reasonable: Does it make sense?Compare your results with worked examples
and other information in the text. (Heeding the advice in Step 5 will also help you to be certain of your result.)
You must understand the problem conceptually to be able to determine whether the numerical result is
reasonable.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Nuclear Fission
Start a chain reaction, or introduce non-radioactive isotopes to prevent one. Control energy production in a nuclear
reactor!
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/l/16fission).
31.7 Tunneling
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define and discuss tunneling.
• Define potential barrier.
• Explain quantum tunneling.
Protons and neutrons areboundinside nuclei, that means energy must be supplied to break them away. The
situation is analogous to a marble in a bowl that can roll around but lacks the energy to get over the rim. It is bound
inside the bowl (seeFigure 31.26). If the marble could get over the rim, it would gain kinetic energy by rolling down
outside. However classically, if the marble does not have enough kinetic energy to get over the rim, it remains
forever trapped in its well.
FIGURE31.26The marble in this semicircular bowl at the top of a volcano has enough kinetic energy to get to the altitude of the dashed
line, but not enough to get over the rim, so that it is trapped forever. If it could find a tunnel through the barrier, it would escape, roll
downhill, and gain kinetic energy.
In a nucleus, the attractive nuclear potential is analogous to the bowl at the top of a volcano (where the “volcano”
refers only to the shape). Protons and neutrons have kinetic energy, but it is about 8 MeV less than that needed to
get out (seeFigure 31.27). That is, they are bound by an average of 8 MeV per nucleon. The slope of the hill outside
the bowl is analogous to the repulsive Coulomb potential for a nucleus, such as for an particle outside a positive
nucleus. In decay, two protons and two neutrons spontaneously break away as a unit. Yet the protons and
neutrons do not have enough kinetic energy to get over the rim. So how does the particle get out?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1429
31.7 • Tunneling 1411
FIGURE31.27Nucleons within an atomic nucleus are bound or trapped by the attractive nuclear force, as shown in this simplified potential
energy curve. An particle outside the range of the nuclear force feels the repulsive Coulomb force. The particle inside the nucleus does
not have enough kinetic energy to get over the rim, yet it does manage to get out by quantum mechanical tunneling.
The answer was supplied in 1928 by the Russian physicist George Gamow (1904–1968). The particle tunnels
through a region of space it is forbidden to be in, and it comes out of the side of the nucleus. Like an electron making
a transition between orbits around an atom, it travels from one point to another without ever having been in
between.Figure 31.28indicates how this works. The wave function of a quantum mechanical particle varies
smoothly, going from within an atomic nucleus (on one side of a potential energy barrier) to outside the nucleus (on
the other side of the potential energy barrier). Inside the barrier, the wave function does not become zero but
decreases exponentially, and we do not observe the particle inside the barrier. The probability of finding a particle is
related to the square of its wave function, and so there is a small probability of finding the particle outside the
barrier, which implies that the particle can tunnel through the barrier. This process is calledbarrier penetrationor
quantum mechanical tunneling. This concept was developed in theory by J. Robert Oppenheimer (who led the
development of the first nuclear bombs during World War II) and was used by Gamow and others to describe
decay.
FIGURE31.28The wave function representing a quantum mechanical particle must vary smoothly, going from within the nucleus (to the
left of the barrier) to outside the nucleus (to the right of the barrier). Inside the barrier, the wave function does not abruptly become zero;
rather, it decreases exponentially. Outside the barrier, the wave function is small but finite, and there it smoothly becomes sinusoidal.
Owing to the fact that there is a small probability of finding the particle outside the barrier, the particle can tunnel through the barrier.
Good ideas explain more than one thing. In addition to qualitatively explaining how the four nucleons in an particle
can get out of the nucleus, the detailed theory also explains quantitatively the half-life of various nuclei that undergo
decay. This description is what Gamow and others devised, and it works for decay half-lives that vary by 17
orders of magnitude. Experiments have shown that the more energetic the decay of a particular nuclide is, the
shorter is its half-life.Tunnelingexplains this in the following manner: For the decay to be more energetic, the
nucleons must have more energy in the nucleus and should be able to ascend a little closer to the rim. The barrier is
therefore not as thick for more energetic decay, and the exponential decrease of the wave function inside the barrier
is not as great. Thus the probability of finding the particle outside the barrier is greater, and the half-life is shorter.
Tunneling as an effect also occurs in quantum mechanical systems other than nuclei. Electrons trapped in solids can
tunnel from one object to another if the barrier between the objects is thin enough. The process is the same in
principle as described for decay. It is far more likely for a thin barrier than a thick one. Scanning tunneling electron
microscopes function on this principle. The current of electrons that travels between a probe and a sample tunnels
through a barrier and is very sensitive to its thickness, allowing detection of individual atoms as shown inFigure
PAGE: 1430
1412 31 • Radioactivity and Nuclear Physics
31.29.
FIGURE31.29(a) A scanning tunneling electron microscope can detect extremely small variations in dimensions, such as individual atoms.
Electrons tunnel quantum mechanically between the probe and the sample. The probability of tunneling is extremely sensitive to barrier
thickness, so that the electron current is a sensitive indicator of surface features. (b) Head and mouthparts ofColeoptera Chrysomelideaas
seen through an electron microscope (credit: Louisa Howard, Dartmouth College)
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Quantum Tunneling and Wave Packets
Watch quantum "particles" tunnel through barriers. Explore the properties of the wave functions that describe these
particles.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/l/21intquatanvid).
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1431
31 • Glossary 1413
Glossary
activity the rate of decay for radioactive nuclides electron’s antineutrino antiparticle of electron’s
alpha decay type of radioactive decay in which an neutrino
atomic nucleus emits an alpha particle electron’s neutrino a subatomic elementary particle
alpha rays one of the types of rays emitted from the which has no net electric charge
nucleus of an atom gamma decay type of radioactive decay in which an
antielectron another term for positron atomic nucleus emits a gamma particle
antimatter composed of antiparticles gamma rays one of the types of rays emitted from the
atomic mass the total mass of the protons, neutrons, nucleus of an atom
and electrons in a single atom Geiger tube a very common radiation detector that
atomic number number of protons in a nucleus usually gives an audio output
barrier penetration quantum mechanical effect half-life the time in which there is a 50% chance that
whereby a particle has a nonzero probability to a nucleus will decay
cross through a potential energy barrier despite not ionizing radiation radiation (whether nuclear in origin
having sufficient energy to pass over the barrier; or not) that produces ionization whether nuclear in
also called quantum mechanical tunneling origin or not
becquerel SI unit for rate of decay of a radioactive isotopes nuclei having the same and different s
material magic numbers a number that indicates a shell
beta decay type of radioactive decay in which an structure for the nucleus in which closed shells are
atomic nucleus emits a beta particle more stable
beta rays one of the types of rays emitted from the mass number number of nucleons in a nucleus
nucleus of an atom neutrino an electrically neutral, weakly interacting
binding energy the energy needed to separate elementary subatomic particle
nucleus into individual protons and neutrons neutron a neutral particle that is found in a nucleus
binding energy per nucleon the binding energy nuclear radiation rays that originate in the nuclei of
calculated per nucleon; it reveals the details of the atoms, the first examples of which were discovered
nuclear force—larger the , the more stable the by Becquerel
nucleus nuclear reaction energy the energy created in a
carbon-14 dating a radioactive dating technique nuclear reaction
based on the radioactivity of carbon-14 nucleons the particles found inside nuclei
chart of the nuclides a table comprising stable and nucleus a region consisting of protons and neutrons
unstable nuclei at the center of an atom
curie the activity of 1g of , equal to nuclide a type of atom whose nucleus has specific
numbers of protons and neutrons
daughter the nucleus obtained when parent nucleus parent the original state of nucleus before decay
decays and produces another nucleus following the photomultiplier a device that converts light into
rules and the conservation laws electrical signals
decay the process by which an atomic nucleus of an positron the particle that results from positive beta
unstable atom loses mass and energy by emitting decay; also known as an antielectron
ionizing particles positron decay type of beta decay in which a proton
decay constant quantity that is inversely proportional is converted to a neutron, releasing a positron and a
to the half-life and that is used in equation for neutrino
number of nuclei as a function of time protons the positively charged nucleons found in a
decay equation the equation to find out how much of nucleus
a radioactive material is left after a given period of quantum mechanical tunneling quantum
time mechanical effect whereby a particle has a nonzero
decay series process whereby subsequent nuclides probability to cross through a potential energy
decay until a stable nuclide is produced barrier despite not having sufficient energy to pass
electron capture the process in which a proton-rich over the barrier; also called barrier penetration
nuclide absorbs an inner atomic electron and radiation detector a device that is used to detect and
simultaneously emits a neutrino track the radiation from a radioactive reaction
electron capture equation equation representing the radioactive a substance or object that emits nuclear
electron capture radiation
PAGE: 1432
1414 31 • Section Summary
radioactive dating an application of radioactive rate of decay the number of radioactive events per
decay in which the age of a material is determined unit time
by the amount of radioactivity of a particular type scintillators a radiation detection method that
that occurs records light produced when radiation interacts with
radioactivity the emission of rays from the nuclei of materials
atoms solid-state radiation detectors semiconductors
radius of a nucleus the radius of a nucleus is fabricated to directly convert incident radiation into
electrical current
range of radiation the distance that the radiation can tunneling a quantum mechanical process of potential
travel through a material energy barrier penetration
Section Summary
31.1Nuclear Radioactivity
• Nuclides having the same but different are
• Some nuclei are radioactive—they spontaneously
isotopes of the same element.
decay destroying some part of their mass and
• The radius of a nucleus, , is approximately
emitting energetic rays, a process called nuclear
radioactivity.
where . Nuclear volumes are
• Nuclear radiation, like x rays, is ionizing radiation,
proportional to . There are two nuclear forces,
because energy sufficient to ionize matter is
the weak and the strong. Systematics in nuclear
emitted in each decay.
stability seen on the chart of the nuclides indicate
• The range (or distance traveled in a material) of
that there are shell closures in nuclei for values of
ionizing radiation is directly related to the charge
and equal to the magic numbers, which
of the emitted particle and its energy, with greater-
correspond to highly stable nuclei.
charge and lower-energy particles having the
shortest ranges. 31.4Nuclear Decay and Conservation Laws
• Radiation detectors are based directly or indirectly
• When a parent nucleus decays, it produces a
upon the ionization created by radiation, as are the
daughter nucleus following rules and conservation
effects of radiation on living and inert materials.
laws. There are three major types of nuclear
31.2Radiation Detection and Detectors decay, called alpha beta and gamma .
The decay equation is
• Radiation detectors are based directly or indirectly
upon the ionization created by radiation, as are the
• Nuclear decay releases an amount of energy
effects of radiation on living and inert materials.
related to the mass destroyed by
31.3Substructure of the Nucleus
• There are three forms of beta decay. The decay
• Two particles, both called nucleons, are found
equation is
inside nuclei. The two types of nucleons are
protons and neutrons; they are very similar, except
that the proton is positively charged while the • The decay equation is
neutron is neutral. Some of their characteristics
are given inTable 31.2and compared with those • The electron capture equation is
of the electron. A mass unit convenient to atomic
and nuclear processes is the unified atomic mass • is an electron, is an antielectron or
unit (u), defined to be positron, represents an electron’s neutrino, and
is an electron’s antineutrino. In addition to all
• A nuclide is a specific combination of protons and previously known conservation laws, two new
neutrons, denoted by ones arise— conservation of electron family
number and conservation of the total number of
is the number of protons or atomic number, X is nucleons. The decay equation is
the symbol for the element, is the number of
neutrons, and is the mass number or the total is a high-energy photon originating in a nucleus.
number of protons and neutrons,
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1433
31 • Conceptual Questions 1415
31.5Half-Life and Activity equation , the activity also has an
exponential behavior, given by
• Half-life is the time in which there is a 50%
chance that a nucleus will decay. The number of
where is the activity at .
nuclei as a function of time is
31.6Binding Energy
where is the number present at , and is
• The binding energy (BE) of a nucleus is the energy
the decay constant, related to the half-life by
needed to separate it into individual protons and
neutrons. In terms of atomic masses,
• One of the applications of radioactive decay is
where is the mass of a hydrogen atom,
radioactive dating, in which the age of a material is
determined by the amount of radioactive decay is the atomic mass of the nuclide, and
that occurs. The rate of decay is called the activity is the mass of a neutron. Patterns in the binding
: energy per nucleon, , reveal details of the
nuclear force. The larger the , the more
stable the nucleus.
• The SI unit for is the becquerel (Bq), defined by
31.7Tunneling
• is also expressed in terms of curies (Ci), where
• Tunneling is a quantum mechanical process of
potential energy barrier penetration. The concept
• The activity of a source is related to and was first applied to explain decay, but tunneling
by is found to occur in other quantum mechanical
systems.
• Since has an exponential behavior as in the
Conceptual Questions
31.1Nuclear Radioactivity 6. ConsiderFigure 31.3. If an electric field is
substituted for the magnetic field with positive
1. Suppose the range for ray is known to be
charge instead of the north pole and negative
2.0 mm in a certain material. Does this mean that
charge instead of the south pole, in which directions
every a ray that strikes this material
will the , , and rays bend?
travels 2.0 mm, or does the range have an average
7. Explain how an particle can have a larger range in
value with some statistical fluctuations in the
air than a particle with the same energy in lead.
distances traveled? Explain.
8. Arrange the following according to their ability to
2. What is the difference between rays and
act as radiation shields, with the best first and
characteristic x rays? Is either necessarily more
worst last. Explain your ordering in terms of how
energetic than the other? Which can be the most
radiation loses its energy in matter.
energetic?
(a) A solid material with low density composed of
3. Ionizing radiation interacts with matter by
low-mass atoms.
scattering from electrons and nuclei in the
(b) A gas composed of high-mass atoms.
substance. Based on the law of conservation of
(c) A gas composed of low-mass atoms.
momentum and energy, explain why electrons tend
(d) A solid with high density composed of high-
to absorb more energy than nuclei in these
mass atoms.
interactions.
9. Often, when people have to work around
4. What characteristics of radioactivity show it to be
radioactive materials spills, we see them wearing
nuclear in origin and not atomic?
white coveralls (usually a plastic material). What
5. What is the source of the energy emitted in
types of radiation (if any) do you think these suits
radioactive decay? Identify an earlier conservation
protect the worker from, and how?
law, and describe how it was modified to take such
processes into account.
PAGE: 1434
1416 31 • Conceptual Questions
31.2Radiation Detection and Detectors 31.5Half-Life and Activity
10. Is it possible for light emitted by a scintillator to 18. In a -year-old rock that originally
be too low in frequency to be used in a contained some , which has a half-life of
photomultiplier tube? Explain. years, we expect to find some
remaining in it. Why are , , and
31.3Substructure of the Nucleus also found in such a rock, even though they have
much shorter half-lives (1600 years, 3.8 days, and
11. The weak and strong nuclear forces are basic to
138 days, respectively)?
the structure of matter. Why we do not experience
19. Does the number of radioactive nuclei in a sample
them directly?
decrease toexactlyhalf its original value in one
12. Define and make clear distinctions between the
half-life? Explain in terms of the statistical nature
terms neutron, nucleon, nucleus, nuclide, and
of radioactive decay.
neutrino.
20. Radioactivity depends on the nucleus and not the
13. What are isotopes? Why do different isotopes of
atom or its chemical state. Why, then, is one
the same element have similar chemistries?
kilogram of uranium more radioactive than one
kilogram of uranium hexafluoride?
31.4Nuclear Decay and Conservation Laws
21. Explain how a bound system can have less mass
14. Star Trek fans have often heard the term than its components. Why is this not observed
“antimatter drive.” Describe how you could use a classically, say for a building made of bricks?
magnetic field to trap antimatter, such as 22. Spontaneous radioactive decay occurs only when
produced by nuclear decay, and later combine it the decay products have less mass than the
with matter to produce energy. Be specific about parent, and it tends to produce a daughter that is
the type of antimatter, the need for vacuum more stable than the parent. Explain how this is
storage, and the fraction of matter converted into related to the fact that more tightly bound nuclei
energy. are more stable. (Consider the binding energy per
15. What conservation law requires an electron’s nucleon.)
neutrino to be produced in electron capture? Note 23. To obtain the most precise value of BE from the
that the electron no longer exists after it is equation ,
captured by the nucleus. we should take into account the binding energy of
16. Neutrinos are experimentally determined to have the electrons in the neutral atoms. Will doing this
an extremely small mass. Huge numbers of produce a larger or smaller value for BE? Why is
neutrinos are created in a supernova at the same this effect usually negligible?
time as massive amounts of light are first 24. How does the finite range of the nuclear force
produced. When the 1987A supernova occurred in relate to the fact that is greatest for near
the Large Magellanic Cloud, visible primarily in the 60?
Southern Hemisphere and some 100,000 light-
years away from Earth, neutrinos from the 31.6Binding Energy
explosion were observed at about the same time
25. Why is the number of neutrons greater than the
as the light from the blast. How could the relative
number of protons in stable nuclei having
arrival times of neutrinos and light be used to
greater than about 40, and why is this effect more
place limits on the mass of neutrinos?
pronounced for the heaviest nuclei?
17. What do the three types of beta decay have in
common that is distinctly different from alpha
31.7Tunneling
decay?
26. A physics student caught breaking conservation
laws is imprisoned. She leans against the cell wall
hoping to tunnel out quantum mechanically.
Explain why her chances are negligible. (This is so
in any classical situation.)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1435
31 • Problems & Exercises 1417
27. When a nucleus decays, does the particle
move continuously from inside the nucleus to
outside? That is, does it travel each point along an
imaginary line from inside to out? Explain.
Problems & Exercises
31.2Radiation Detection and Detectors 9. (a) Calculate the radius of , one of the most
tightly bound stable nuclei.
1. The energy of 30.0 is required to ionize a
(b) What is the ratio of the radius of to that of
molecule of the gas inside a Geiger tube, thereby
, one of the largest nuclei ever made? Note
producing an ion pair. Suppose a particle of ionizing
that the radius of the largest nucleus is still much
radiation deposits 0.500 MeV of energy in this
smaller than the size of an atom.
Geiger tube. What maximum number of ion pairs
10. The unified atomic mass unit is defined to be
can it create?
× . Verify that this amount
2. A particle of ionizing radiation creates 4000 ion
pairs in the gas inside a Geiger tube as it passes of mass converted to energy yields 931.5 MeV.
through. What minimum energy was deposited, if Note that you must use four-digit or better values
30.0 is required to create each ion pair? for and .
3. (a) Repeat the previous exercise, and convert the 11. What is the ratio of the velocity of a particle to
energy to joules or calories. (b) If all of this energy that of an particle, if they have the same
is converted to thermal energy in the gas, what is its nonrelativistic kinetic energy?
temperature increase, assuming of ideal 12. If a 1.50-cm-thick piece of lead can absorb 90.0%
gas at 0.250-atm pressure? (The small answer is of the rays from a radioactive source, how many
consistent with the fact that the energy is large on a centimeters of lead are needed to absorb all but
quantum mechanical scale but small on a 0.100% of the rays?
macroscopic scale.) 13. The detail observable using a probe is limited by
4. Suppose a particle of ionizing radiation deposits 1.0 its wavelength. Calculate the energy of a -ray
MeV in the gas of a Geiger tube, all of which goes to photon that has a wavelength of ,
creating ion pairs. Each ion pair requires 30.0 eV of small enough to detect details about one-tenth
energy. (a) The applied voltage sweeps the ions out the size of a nucleon. Note that a photon having
of the gas in . What is the current? (b) This this energy is difficult to produce and interacts
current is smaller than the actual current since the poorly with the nucleus, limiting the practicability
applied voltage in the Geiger tube accelerates the of this probe.
separated ions, which then create other ion pairs in 14. (a) Show that if you assume the average nucleus is
subsequent collisions. What is the current if this spherical with a radius , and with a
last effect multiplies the number of ion pairs by mass of u, then its density is independent of .
900? (b) Calculate that density in and , and
compare your results with those found inExample
31.3Substructure of the Nucleus 31.1for .
15. What is the ratio of the velocity of a 5.00-MeV
5. Verify that a mass of water at normal
ray to that of an particle with the same kinetic
density would make a cube 60 km on a side, as
energy? This should confirm that s travel much
claimed inExample 31.1. (This mass at nuclear
faster than s even when relativity is taken into
density would make a cube 1.0 m on a side.)
consideration. (See alsoExercise 31.11.)
6. Find the length of a side of a cube having a mass of
16. (a) What is the kinetic energy in MeV of a ray that
1.0 kg and the density of nuclear matter, taking this
is traveling at ? This gives some idea of how
to be × .
energetic a ray must be to travel at nearly the
7. What is the radius of an particle? same speed as a ray. (b) What is the velocity of
8. Find the radius of a nucleus. is a the ray relative to the ray?
manufactured nuclide that is used as a power
source on some space probes. 31.4Nuclear Decay and Conservation Laws
In the following eight problems, write the complete
decay equation for the given nuclide in the complete
PAGE: 1436
1418 31 • Problems & Exercises
notation. Refer to the periodic table for values of 29. When an electron and positron annihilate, both
. their masses are destroyed, creating two equal
energy photons to preserve momentum. (a)
17. decay of (tritium), a manufactured isotope
Confirm that the annihilation equation
of hydrogen used in some digital watch displays,
conserves charge, electron
and manufactured primarily for use in hydrogen
family number, and total number of nucleons. To
bombs.
do this, identify the values of each before and
18. decay of , a naturally occurring rare
after the annihilation. (b) Find the energy of each
isotope of potassium responsible for some of our
ray, assuming the electron and positron are
exposure to background radiation.
initially nearly at rest. (c) Explain why the two
19. decay of .
rays travel in exactly opposite directions if the
20. decay of .
center of mass of the electron-positron system is
21. Electron capture by . initially at rest.
22. Electron capture by . 30. Confirm that charge, electron family number, and
23. decay of , the isotope of polonium in the the total number of nucleons are all conserved by
decay series of that was discovered by the the rule for decay given in the equation
Curies. A favorite isotope in physics labs, since it . To do this, identify
has a short half-life and decays to a stable nuclide.
the values of each before and after the decay.
24. decay of , another isotope in the decay
31. Confirm that charge, electron family number, and
series of , first recognized as a new element
the total number of nucleons are all conserved by
by the Curies. Poses special problems because its
the rule for decay given in the equation
daughter is a radioactive noble gas.
. To do this,
In the following four problems, identify the parent
identify the values of each before and after the
nuclide and write the complete decay equation in the
decay.
notation. Refer to the periodic table for values of
32. Confirm that charge, electron family number, and
.
the total number of nucleons are all conserved by
25. decay producing . The parent nuclide is the rule for decay given in the equation
a major waste product of reactors and has . To do this,
chemistry similar to potassium and sodium, identify the values of each before and after the
resulting in its concentration in your cells if decay.
ingested. 33. Confirm that charge, electron family number, and
26. decay producing . The parent nuclide is a the total number of nucleons are all conserved by
major waste product of reactors and has the rule for electron capture given in the equation
chemistry similar to calcium, so that it is . To do this,
concentrated in bones if ingested ( is also identify the values of each before and after the
radioactive.) capture.
27. decay producing . The parent nuclide is 34. A rare decay mode has been observed in which
nearly 100% of the natural element and is found emits a nucleus. (a) The decay
in gas lantern mantles and in metal alloys used in equation is . Identify the
jets ( is also radioactive). nuclide . (b) Find the energy emitted in the
28. decay producing . The parent nuclide is in decay. The mass of is 222.015353 u.
the decay series produced by , the only 35. (a) Write the complete decay equation for
naturally occurring isotope of thorium. .
(b) Find the energy released in the decay.
36. (a) Write the complete decay equation for .
(b) Find the energy released in the decay.
37. (a) Write the complete decay equation for the
neutron. (b) Find the energy released in the decay.
38. (a) Write the complete decay equation for
, a major waste product of nuclear reactors.
(b) Find the energy released in the decay.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1437
31 • Problems & Exercises 1419
39. Calculate the energy released in the decay of 49. Cow’s milk produced near nuclear reactors can be
, the equation for which is given in the text. tested for as little as 1.00 pCi of per liter, to
The masses of and are 21.994434 and check for possible reactor leakage. What mass of
21.991383 u, respectively. has this activity?
40. (a) Write the complete decay equation for . 50. (a) Natural potassium contains , which has a
(b) Calculate the energy released in the decay. The half-life of y. What mass of in a
masses of and are 11.011433 and person would have a decay rate of 4140 Bq? (b)
11.009305 u, respectively. What is the fraction of in natural potassium,
41. (a) Calculate the energy released in the decay of given that the person has 140 g in his body?
. (These numbers are typical for a 70-kg adult.)
(b) What fraction of the mass of a single is 51. There is more than one isotope of natural
destroyed in the decay? The mass of is uranium. If a researcher isolates 1.00 mg of the
234.043593 u. relatively scarce and finds this mass to have
(c) Although the fractional mass loss is large for a an activity of 80.0 Bq, what is its half-life in years?
single nucleus, it is difficult to observe for an 52. has one of the longest known radioactive
entire macroscopic sample of uranium. Why is half-lives. In a difficult experiment, a researcher
this? found that the activity of 1.00 kg of is 1.75
42. (a) Write the complete reaction equation for Bq. What is the half-life in years?
electron capture by 53. You can sometimes find deep red crystal vases in
(b) Calculate the energy released. antique stores, called uranium glass because their
43. (a) Write the complete reaction equation for color was produced by doping the glass with
electron capture by . uranium. Look up the natural isotopes of uranium
(b) Calculate the energy released. and their half-lives, and calculate the activity of
such a vase assuming it has 2.00 g of uranium in
31.5Half-Life and Activity it. Neglect the activity of any daughter nuclides.
54. A tree falls in a forest. How many years must pass
Data from the appendices and the periodic table may
before the activity in 1.00 g of the tree’s
be needed for these problems.
carbon drops to 1.00 decay per hour?
44. An old campfire is uncovered during an 55. What fraction of the that was on Earth when it
archaeological dig. Its charcoal is found to contain formed years ago is left today?
less than 1/1000 the normal amount of . 56. A 5000-Ci source used for cancer therapy is
Estimate the minimum age of the charcoal, noting considered too weak to be useful when its activity
that . falls to 3500 Ci. How long after its manufacture
45. A source is labeled 4.00 mCi, but its present does this happen?
activity is found to be Bq. (a) What is 57. Natural uranium is 0.7200% and 99.27%
the present activity in mCi? (b) How long ago did it . What were the percentages of and
actually have a 4.00-mCi activity? in natural uranium when Earth formed
46. (a) Calculate the activity in curies of 1.00 g of years ago?
. (b) Discuss why your answer is not exactly 58. The particles emitted in the decay of
1.00 Ci, given that the curie was originally (tritium) interact with matter to create light in a
supposed to be exactly the activity of a gram of glow-in-the-dark exit sign. At the time of
radium. manufacture, such a sign contains 15.0 Ci of .
47. Show that the activity of the in 1.00 g of (a) What is the mass of the tritium? (b) What is its
found in living tissue is 0.250 Bq. activity 5.00 y after manufacture?
48. Mantles for gas lanterns contain thorium, because 59. World War II aircraft had instruments with glowing
it forms an oxide that can survive being heated to radium-painted dials (seeFigure 31.2). The
incandescence for long periods of time. Natural activity of one such instrument was Bq
thorium is almost 100% , with a half-life of when new. (a) What mass of was present?
. If an average lantern mantle (b) After some years, the phosphors on the dials
contains 300 mg of thorium, what is its activity? deteriorated chemically, but the radium did not
escape. What is the activity of this instrument 57.0
years after it was made?
PAGE: 1438
1420 31 • Problems & Exercises
60. (a) The source used in a physics laboratory 64. TheGalileospace probe was launched on its long
is labeled as having an activity of on the journey past several planets in 1989, with an
date it was prepared. A student measures the ultimate goal of Jupiter. Its power source is 11.0
radioactivity of this source with a Geiger counter kg of , a by-product of nuclear weapons
and observes 1500 counts per minute. She plutonium production. Electrical energy is
notices that the source was prepared 120 days generated thermoelectrically from the heat
before her lab. What fraction of the decays is she produced when the 5.59-MeV particles emitted
observing with her apparatus? (b) Identify some of in each decay crash to a halt inside the plutonium
the reasons that only a fraction of the s emitted and its shielding. The half-life of is 87.7
are observed by the detector. years. (a) What was the original activity of the
61. Armor-piercing shells with depleted uranium in becquerel? (b) What power was emitted
cores are fired by aircraft at tanks. (The high in kilowatts? (c) What power was emitted 12.0 y
density of the uranium makes them effective.) The after launch? You may neglect any extra energy
uranium is called depleted because it has had its from daughter nuclides and any losses from
removed for reactor use and is nearly pure escaping rays.
. Depleted uranium has been erroneously 65. Construct Your Own Problem
called non-radioactive. To demonstrate that this is Consider the generation of electricity by a
wrong: (a) Calculate the activity of 60.0 g of pure radioactive isotope in a space probe, such as
. (b) Calculate the activity of 60.0 g of natural described in the previous exercise. Construct a
uranium, neglecting the and all daughter problem in which you calculate the mass of a
nuclides. radioactive isotope you need in order to supply
62. The ceramic glaze on a red-orange Fiestaware power for a long space flight. Among the things to
plate is and contains 50.0 grams of , consider are the isotope chosen, its half-life and
but very little . (a) What is the activity of the decay energy, the power needs of the probe and
plate? (b) Calculate the total energy that will be the length of the flight.
released by the decay. (c) If energy is worth 66. Unreasonable Results
12.0 cents per , what is the monetary value A nuclear physicist finds of in a piece
of the energy emitted? (These plates went out of of uranium ore and assumes it is primordial since
production some 30 years ago, but are still its half-life is . (a) Calculate the
available as collectibles.) amount of that would had to have been on
63. Large amounts of depleted uranium ( ) are Earth when it formed ago for
available as a by-product of uranium processing to be left today. (b) What is unreasonable about
for reactor fuel and weapons. Uranium is very this result? (c) What assumption is responsible?
dense and makes good counter weights for 67. Unreasonable Results
aircraft. Suppose you have a 4000-kg block of (a) RepeatExercise 31.57but include the
. (a) Find its activity. (b) How many calories 0.0055% natural abundance of with its
per day are generated by thermalization of the half-life. (b) What is unreasonable
decay energy? (c) Do you think you could detect about this result? (c) What assumption is
this as heat? Explain. responsible? (d) Where does the come from
if it is not primordial?
68. Unreasonable Results
The manufacturer of a smoke alarm decides that
the smallest current of radiation he can detect is
. (a) Find the activity in curies of an
emitter that produces a current of
particles. (b) What is unreasonable about this
result? (c) What assumption is responsible?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1439
31 • Problems & Exercises 1421
31.6Binding Energy 75. The purpose of this problem is to show in three
ways that the binding energy of the electron in a
69. is a loosely bound isotope of hydrogen. Called
hydrogen atom is negligible compared with the
deuterium or heavy hydrogen, it is stable but
masses of the proton and electron. (a) Calculate
relatively rare—it is 0.015% of natural hydrogen.
the mass equivalent in u of the 13.6-eV binding
Note that deuterium has , which should
energy of an electron in a hydrogen atom, and
tend to make it more tightly bound, but both are
compare this with the mass of the hydrogen atom
odd numbers. Calculate , the binding energy
obtained fromAppendix A. (b) Subtract the mass
per nucleon, for and compare it with the
of the proton given inTable 31.2from the mass of
approximate value obtained from the graph in
the hydrogen atom given inAppendix A. You will
Figure 31.24.
find the difference is equal to the electron’s mass
70. is among the most tightly bound of all
to three digits, implying the binding energy is
nuclides. It is more than 90% of natural iron. Note
small in comparison. (c) Take the ratio of the
that has even numbers of both protons and
binding energy of the electron (13.6 eV) to the
neutrons. Calculate , the binding energy per
energy equivalent of the electron’s mass (0.511
nucleon, for and compare it with the
MeV). (d) Discuss how your answers confirm the
approximate value obtained from the graph in
stated purpose of this problem.
Figure 31.24.
76. Unreasonable Results
71. is the heaviest stable nuclide, and its A particle physicist discovers a neutral particle
is low compared with medium-mass nuclides. with a mass of 2.02733 u that he assumes is two
Calculate , the binding energy per nucleon, neutrons bound together. (a) Find the binding
for and compare it with the approximate energy. (b) What is unreasonable about this
value obtained from the graph inFigure 31.24. result? (c) What assumptions are unreasonable or
72. (a) Calculate for , the rarer of the two inconsistent?
most common uranium isotopes. (b) Calculate
for . (Most of uranium is .) Note 31.7Tunneling
that has even numbers of both protons and
77. Derive an approximate relationship between the
neutrons. Is the of significantly
energy of decay and half-life using the following data.
different from that of ?
It may be useful to graph the log of against to
73. (a) Calculate for . Stable and relatively
find some straight-line relationship.
tightly bound, this nuclide is most of natural
carbon. (b) Calculate for . Is the Nuclide
difference in between and
significant? One is stable and common, and the
other is unstable and rare.
74. The fact that is greatest for near 60
implies that the range of the nuclear force is about
the diameter of such nuclides. (a) Calculate the
diameter of an nucleus. (b) Compare
for and . The first is one of the
most tightly bound nuclides, while the second is
larger and less tightly bound.
TABLE31.3Energy and Half-Life for Decay
78. Integrated Concepts
A 2.00-T magnetic field is applied perpendicular
to the path of charged particles in a bubble
chamber. What is the radius of curvature of the
path of a 10 MeV proton in this field? Neglect any
slowing along its path.
PAGE: 1440
1422 31 • Problems & Exercises
79. (a) Write the decay equation for the decay of 82. Unreasonable Results
. (b) What energy is released in this decay? A frazzled theoretical physicist reckons that all
The mass of the daughter nuclide is 231.036298 conservation laws are obeyed in the decay of a
u. (c) Assuming the residual nucleus is formed in proton into a neutron, positron, and neutrino (as in
its ground state, how much energy goes to the decay of a nucleus) and sends a paper to a
particle? journal to announce the reaction as a possible end
80. Unreasonable Results of the universe due to the spontaneous decay of
The relatively scarce naturally occurring calcium protons. (a) What energy is released in this decay?
isotope has a half-life of about . (b) What is unreasonable about this result? (c)
(a) A small sample of this isotope is labeled as What assumption is responsible?
having an activity of 1.0 Ci. What is the mass of the 83. Construct Your Own Problem
in the sample? (b) What is unreasonable Consider the decay of radioactive substances in
about this result? (c) What assumption is the Earth’s interior. The energy emitted is
responsible? converted to thermal energy that reaches the
81. Unreasonable Results earth’s surface and is radiated away into cold dark
A physicist scatters rays from a substance and space. Construct a problem in which you estimate
sees evidence of a nucleus in the activity in a cubic meter of earth rock? And
radius. (a) Find the atomic mass of such a nucleus. then calculate the power generated. Calculate
(b) What is unreasonable about this result? (c) how much power must cross each square meter of
What is unreasonable about the assumption? the Earth’s surface if the power is dissipated at the
same rate as it is generated. Among the things to
consider are the activity per cubic meter, the
energy per decay, and the size of the Earth.
84. Critical Thinking(a) What is the density of in
? (b) If splits into and
neutrons, how does the density of compare
with the density of each element it splits into?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1441
CHAPTER 32
Medical Applications of Nuclear Physics
FIGURE32.1Tori Randall, Ph.D., curator for the Department of Physical Anthropology at the San Diego Museum of Man, prepares a
550-year-old Peruvian mummy for a CT scan at Naval Medical Center San Diego. (credit: U.S. Navy photo by Mass Communication Specialist
3rd Class Samantha A. Lewis)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
32.1Diagnostics and Medical Imaging
32.2Biological Effects of Ionizing Radiation
32.3Therapeutic Uses of Ionizing Radiation
32.4Food Irradiation
32.5Fusion
32.6Fission
32.7Nuclear Weapons
INTRODUCTION TO APPLICATIONS OF NUCLEAR PHYSICS Applications of nuclear physics have become an
integral part of modern life. From the bone scan that detects a cancer to the radioiodine treatment that cures
another, nuclear radiation has diagnostic and therapeutic effects on medicine. From the fission power reactor to the
hope of controlled fusion, nuclear energy is now commonplace and is a part of our plans for the future. Yet, the
PAGE: 1442
1424 32 • Medical Applications of Nuclear Physics
destructive potential of nuclear weapons haunts us, as does the possibility of nuclear reactor accidents. Certainly,
several applications of nuclear physics escape our view, as seen inFigure 32.1. Not only has nuclear physics
revealed secrets of nature, it has an inevitable impact based on its applications, as they are intertwined with human
values. Because of its potential for alleviation of suffering, and its power as an ultimate destructor of life, nuclear
physics is often viewed with ambivalence. But it provides perhaps the best example that applications can be good or
evil, while knowledge itself is neither.
32.1 Diagnostics and Medical Imaging
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the working principle behind an anger camera.
• Describe the SPECT and PET imaging techniques.
Most medical and related applications of nuclear physics are driven, at their core, by the difference between a
radioactive substance and a non-radioactive substance. One of the first such methods is the precision measurement
and detection method known as radioimmunoassay (RIA). Developed by Rosalyn Sussman Yalow and Solomon
Berson in the late 1950s, RIA relies on the principle of competitive binding. For the particular substance being
measured, a sample containing a radioactive isotope is prepared. A known quantity of antibodies is then introduced.
By measuring the amount of "unbound" antibodies after the reaction, technicians can detect and measure the
precise amount of the target substance. Radioimmunoassay is essential in cancer screening, hepatitis diagnosis,
narcotics investigation, and other analyses.
A host of medical imaging techniques employ nuclear radiation. What makes nuclear radiation so useful? First,
radiation can easily penetrate tissue; hence, it is a useful probe to monitor conditions inside the body. Second,
nuclear radiation depends on the nuclide and not on the chemical compound it is in, so that a radioactive nuclide
can be put into a compound designed for specific purposes. The compound is said to betagged. A tagged
compound used for medical purposes is called aradiopharmaceutical. Radiation detectors external to the body can
determine the location and concentration of a radiopharmaceutical to yield medically useful information. For
example, certain drugs are concentrated in inflamed regions of the body, and this information can aid diagnosis and
treatment as seen inFigure 32.2. Another application utilizes a radiopharmaceutical which the body sends to bone
cells, particularly those that are most active, to detect cancerous tumors or healing points. Images can then be
produced of such bone scans. Radioisotopes are also used to determine the functioning of body organs, such as
blood flow, heart muscle activity, and iodine uptake in the thyroid gland.
FIGURE32.2A radiopharmaceutical is used to produce this brain image of a patient with Alzheimer’s disease. Certain features are
computer enhanced. (credit: National Institutes of Health)
Medical Application
Table 32.1lists certain medical diagnostic uses of radiopharmaceuticals, including isotopes and activities that are
typically administered. Many organs can be imaged with a variety of nuclear isotopes replacing a stable element by a
radioactive isotope. One common diagnostic employs iodine to image the thyroid, since iodine is concentrated in
that organ. The most active thyroid cells, including cancerous cells, concentrate the most iodine and, therefore, emit
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1443
32.1 • Diagnostics and Medical Imaging 1425
the most radiation. Conversely, hypothyroidism is indicated by lack of iodine uptake. Note that there is more than
one isotope that can be used for several types of scans. Another common nuclear diagnostic is the thallium scan for
the cardiovascular system, particularly used to evaluate blockages in the coronary arteries and examine heart
activity. The salt TlCl can be used, because it acts like NaCl and follows the blood. Gallium-67 accumulates where
there is rapid cell growth, such as in tumors and sites of infection. Hence, it is useful in cancer imaging. Usually, the
patient receives the injection one day and has a whole body scan 3 or 4 days later because it can take several days
for the gallium to build up.
Typical activity (mCi), where
Procedure, isotope
Brain scan
7.5
7.5
20
20
50
10
Lung scan
2
7.5
Cardiovascular blood pool
0.2
2
Cardiovascular arterial flow
3
7.5
Thyroid scan
0.05
0.07
TABLE32.1Diagnostic Uses of Radiopharmaceuticals
PAGE: 1444
1426 32 • Medical Applications of Nuclear Physics
Typical activity (mCi), where
Procedure, isotope
Liver scan
(colloid) 0.1
(colloid) 2
Bone scan
0.1
10
Kidney scan
0.1
1.5
TABLE32.1Diagnostic Uses of Radiopharmaceuticals
Note thatTable 32.1lists many diagnostic uses for , where “m” stands for a metastable state of the
technetium nucleus. Perhaps 80 percent of all radiopharmaceutical procedures employ because of its many
advantages. One is that the decay of its metastable state produces a single, easily identified 0.142-MeV ray.
Additionally, the radiation dose to the patient is limited by the short 6.0-h half-life of . And, although its half-
life is short, it is easily and continuously produced on site. The basic process for production is neutron activation of
molybdenum, which quickly decays into . Technetium-99m can be attached to many compounds to allow
the imaging of the skeleton, heart, lungs, kidneys, etc.
Figure 32.3shows one of the simpler methods of imaging the concentration of nuclear activity, employing a device
called anAnger cameraorgamma camera. A piece of lead with holes bored through it collimates rays emerging
from the patient, allowing detectors to receive rays from specific directions only. The computer analysis of
detector signals produces an image. One of the disadvantages of this detection method is that there is no depth
information (i.e., it provides a two-dimensional view of the tumor as opposed to a three-dimensional view), because
radiation from any location under that detector produces a signal.
FIGURE32.3An Anger or gamma camera consists of a lead collimator and an array of detectors. Gamma rays produce light flashes in the
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1445
32.1 • Diagnostics and Medical Imaging 1427
scintillators. The light output is converted to an electrical signal by the photomultipliers. A computer constructs an image from the detector
output.
Imaging techniques much like those in x-ray computed tomography (CT) scans use nuclear activity in patients to
form three-dimensional images.Figure 32.4shows a patient in a circular array of detectors that may be stationary
or rotated, with detector output used by a computer to construct a detailed image. This technique is calledsingle-
photon-emission computed tomography(SPECT)or sometimes simply SPET. The spatial resolution of this
technique is poor, about 1 cm, but the contrast (i.e. the difference in visual properties that makes an object
distinguishable from other objects and the background) is good.
FIGURE32.4SPECT uses a geometry similar to a CT scanner to form an image of the concentration of a radiopharmaceutical compound.
(credit: Woldo, Wikimedia Commons)
Images produced by emitters have become important in recent years. When the emitted positron ( )
encounters an electron, mutual annihilation occurs, producing two rays. These rays have identical 0.511-MeV
energies (the energy comes from the destruction of an electron or positron mass) and they move directly away from
one another, allowing detectors to determine their point of origin accurately, as shown inFigure 32.5. The system is
calledpositron emission tomography (PET). It requires detectors on opposite sides to simultaneously (i.e., at the
same time) detect photons of 0.511-MeV energy and utilizes computer imaging techniques similar to those in SPECT
and CT scans. Examples of -emitting isotopes used in PET are , , , and , as seen inTable 32.1.
This list includes C, N, and O, and so they have the advantage of being able to function as tags for natural body
compounds. Its resolution of 0.5 cm is better than that of SPECT; the accuracy and sensitivity of PET scans make
them useful for examining the brain’s anatomy and function. The brain’s use of oxygen and water can be monitored
with . PET is used extensively for diagnosing brain disorders. It can note decreased metabolism in certain
regions prior to a confirmation of Alzheimer’s disease. PET can locate regions in the brain that become active when a
person carries out specific activities, such as speaking, closing their eyes, and so on.
FIGURE32.5A PET system takes advantage of the two identical -ray photons produced by positron-electron annihilation. These rays are
emitted in opposite directions, so that the line along which each pair is emitted is determined. Various events detected by several pairs of
detectors are then analyzed by the computer to form an accurate image.
PAGE: 1446
1428 32 • Medical Applications of Nuclear Physics
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Simplified MRI
Is it a tumor? Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) can tell. Your head is full of tiny radio transmitters (the nuclear
spins of the hydrogen nuclei of your water molecules). In an MRI unit, these little radios can be made to broadcast
their positions, giving a detailed picture of the inside of your head.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/l/02simplemri).
32.2 Biological Effects of Ionizing Radiation
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define various units of radiation.
• Describe RBE.
We hear many seemingly contradictory things about the biological effects of ionizing radiation. It can cause cancer,
burns, and hair loss, yet it is used to treat and even cure cancer. How do we understand these effects? Once again,
there is an underlying simplicity in nature, even in complicated biological organisms. All the effects of ionizing
radiation on biological tissue can be understood by knowing thationizing radiation affects molecules within cells,
particularly DNA molecules.
Let us take a brief look at molecules within cells and how cells operate. Cells have long, double-helical DNA
molecules containing chemical codes called genetic codes that govern the function and processes undertaken by
the cell. It is for unraveling the double-helical structure of DNA that James Watson, Francis Crick, and Maurice
Wilkins received the Nobel Prize. Damage to DNA consists of breaks in chemical bonds or other changes in the
structural features of the DNA chain, leading to changes in the genetic code. In human cells, we can have as many as
a million individual instances of damage to DNA per cell per day. It is remarkable that DNA contains codes that
check whether the DNA is damaged or can repair itself. It is like an auto check and repair mechanism. This repair
ability of DNA is vital for maintaining the integrity of the genetic code and for the normal functioning of the entire
organism. It should be constantly active and needs to respond rapidly. The rate of DNA repair depends on various
factors such as the cell type and age of the cell. A cell with a damaged ability to repair DNA, which could have been
induced by ionizing radiation, can do one of the following:
• The cell can go into an irreversible state of dormancy, known as senescence.
• The cell can initiate programmed cell death.
• The cell can go into unregulated cell division leading to tumors and cancers.
Since ionizing radiation damages the DNA, which is critical in cell reproduction, it has its greatest effect on cells that
rapidly reproduce, including most types of cancer. Thus, cancer cells are more sensitive to radiation than normal
cells and can be killed by it easily. Cancer is characterized by a malfunction of cell reproduction, and can also be
caused by ionizing radiation. Without contradiction, ionizing radiation can be both a cure and a cause.
To discuss quantitatively the biological effects of ionizing radiation, we need a radiation dose unit that is directly
related to those effects. All effects of radiation are assumed to be directly proportional to the amount of ionization
produced in the biological organism. The amount of ionization is in turn proportional to the amount of deposited
energy. Therefore, we define aradiation dose unitcalled therad, as of a joule of ionizing energy deposited
per kilogram of tissue, which is
32.1
For example, if a 50.0-kg person is exposed to ionizing radiation over her entire body and she absorbs 1.00 J, then
her whole-body radiation dose is
32.2
If the same 1.00 J of ionizing energy were absorbed in her 2.00-kg forearm alone, then the dose to the forearm
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1447
32.2 • Biological Effects of Ionizing Radiation 1429
would be
32.3
and the unaffected tissue would have a zero rad dose. While calculating radiation doses, you divide the energy
absorbed by the mass of affected tissue. You must specify the affected region, such as the whole body or forearm in
addition to giving the numerical dose in rads. The SI unit for radiation dose is thegray (Gy), which is defined to be
32.4
However, the rad is still commonly used. Although the energy per kilogram in 1 rad is small, it has significant effects
since the energy causes ionization. The energy needed for a single ionization is a few eV, or less than . Thus,
0.01 J of ionizing energy can create a huge number of ion pairs and have an effect at the cellular level.
The effects of ionizing radiation may be directly proportional to the dose in rads, but they also depend on the type of
radiation and the type of tissue. That is, for a given dose in rads, the effects depend on whether the radiation is
x-ray, or some other type of ionizing radiation. In the earlier discussion of the range of ionizing radiation, it
was noted that energy is deposited in a series of ionizations and not in a single interaction. Each ion pair or
ionization requires a certain amount of energy, so that the number of ion pairs is directly proportional to the amount
of the deposited ionizing energy. But, if the range of the radiation is small, as it is for s, then the ionization and the
damage created is more concentrated and harder for the organism to repair, as seen inFigure 32.6. Concentrated
damage is more difficult for biological organisms to repair than damage that is spread out, so short-range particles
have greater biological effects. Therelative biological effectiveness(RBE) orquality factor(QF)is given inTable
32.2for several types of ionizing radiation—the effect of the radiation is directly proportional to the RBE. A dose unit
more closely related to effects in biological tissue is called theroentgen equivalent manor rem and is defined to be
the dose in rads multiplied by the relative biological effectiveness.
32.5
FIGURE32.6The image shows ionization created in cells by and radiation. Because of its shorter range, the ionization and damage
created by is more concentrated and harder for the organism to repair. Thus, the RBE for s is greater than the RBE for s, even though
they create the same amount of ionization at the same energy.
So, if a person had a whole-body dose of 2.00 rad of radiation, the dose in rem would be
. If the person had a whole-body dose of 2.00 rad of radiation, then the
dose in rem would be . The s would have 20 times the effect on the person
than the s for the same deposited energy. The SI equivalent of the rem is thesievert(Sv), defined to be
, so that
32.6
The RBEs given inTable 32.2are approximate, but they yield certain insights. For example, the eyes are more
sensitive to radiation, because the cells of the lens do not repair themselves. Neutrons cause more damage than
rays, although both are neutral and have large ranges, because neutrons often cause secondary radiation when they
are captured. Note that the RBEs are 1 for higher-energy s, s, and x-rays, three of the most common types of
radiation. For those types of radiation, the numerical values of the dose in rem and rad are identical. For example, 1
rad of radiation is also 1 rem. For that reason, rads are still widely quoted rather than rem.Table 32.3summarizes
the units that are used for radiation.
PAGE: 1448
1430 32 • Medical Applications of Nuclear Physics
Misconception Alert: Activity vs. Dose
“Activity” refers to the radioactive source while “dose” refers to the amount of energy from the radiation that is
deposited in a person or object.
A high level of activity doesn’t mean much if a person is far away from the source. The activity of a source
depends upon the quantity of material (kg) as well as the half-life. A short half-life will produce many more
disintegrations per second. Recall that . Also, the activity decreases exponentially, which is seen in the
equation .
Type and energy of radiation RBE1
X-rays 1
rays 1
rays greater than 32 keV 1
rays less than 32 keV 1.7
Neutrons, thermal to slow (<20 keV) 2–5
Neutrons, fast (1–10 MeV) 10 (body), 32 (eyes)
Protons (1–10 MeV) 10 (body), 32 (eyes)
rays from radioactive decay 10–20
Heavy ions from accelerators 10–20
TABLE32.2Relative Biological Effectiveness
Quantity SI unit name Definition Former unit Conversion
Activity Becquerel (bq) decay/s Curie (Ci)
Absorbed dose Gray (Gy) 1 J/kg rad
Dose Equivalent Sievert (Sv) 1 J/kg × RBE rem
TABLE32.3Units for Radiation
The large-scale effects of radiation on humans can be divided into two categories: immediate effects and long-term
effects.Table 32.4gives the immediate effects of whole-body exposures received in less than one day. If the
radiation exposure is spread out over more time, greater doses are needed to cause the effects listed. This is due to
the body’s ability to partially repair the damage. Any dose less than 100 mSv (10 rem) is called alow dose, 0.1 Sv to
1 Sv (10 to 100 rem) is called amoderate dose, and anything greater than 1 Sv (100 rem) is called ahigh dose.
There is no known way to determine after the fact if a person has been exposed to less than 10 mSv.
1 Values approximate, difficult to determine.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1449
32.2 • Biological Effects of Ionizing Radiation 1431
Dose in Sv2 Effect
0–0.10 No observable effect.
0.1 – 1 Slight to moderate decrease in white blood cell counts.
0.5 Temporary sterility; 0.35 for women, 0.50 for men.
1 – 2 Significant reduction in blood cell counts, brief nausea and vomiting. Rarely fatal.
2 – 5 Nausea, vomiting, hair loss, severe blood damage, hemorrhage, fatalities.
4.5 LD50/32. Lethal to 50% of the population within 32 days after exposure if not treated.
5 – 20 Worst effects due to malfunction of small intestine and blood systems. Limited survival.
>20 Fatal within hours due to collapse of central nervous system.
TABLE32.4Immediate Effects of Radiation (Adults, Whole Body, Single Exposure)
Immediate effects are explained by the effects of radiation on cells and the sensitivity of rapidly reproducing cells to
radiation. The first clue that a person has been exposed to radiation is a change in blood count, which is not
surprising since blood cells are the most rapidly reproducing cells in the body. At higher doses, nausea and hair loss
are observed, which may be due to interference with cell reproduction. Cells in the lining of the digestive system
also rapidly reproduce, and their destruction causes nausea. When the growth of hair cells slows, the hair follicles
become thin and break off. High doses cause significant cell death in all systems, but the lowest doses that cause
fatalities do so by weakening the immune system through the loss of white blood cells.
The two known long-term effects of radiation are cancer and genetic defects. Both are directly attributable to the
interference of radiation with cell reproduction. For high doses of radiation, the risk of cancer is reasonably well
known from studies of exposed groups. Hiroshima and Nagasaki survivors and a smaller number of people exposed
by their occupation, such as radium dial painters, have been fully documented. Chernobyl victims will be studied for
many decades, with some data already available. For example, a significant increase in childhood thyroid cancer has
been observed. The risk of a radiation-induced cancer for low and moderate doses is generallyassumedto be
proportional to the risk known for high doses. Under this assumption, any dose of radiation, no matter how small,
involves a risk to human health. This is called thelinear hypothesisand it may be prudent, but itiscontroversial.
There is some evidence that, unlike the immediate effects of radiation, the long-term effects are cumulative and
there is little self-repair. This is analogous to the risk of skin cancer from UV exposure, which is known to be
cumulative.
There is a latency period for the onset of radiation-induced cancer of about 2 years for leukemia and 15 years for
most other forms. The person is at risk for at least 30 years after the latency period. Omitting many details, the
overall risk of a radiation-induced cancer death per year per rem of exposure is about 10 in a million, which can be
written as .
If a person receives a dose of 1 rem, his risk each year of dying from radiation-induced cancer is 10 in a million and
that risk continues for about 30 years. The lifetime risk is thus 300 in a million, or 0.03 percent. Since about 20
percent of all worldwide deaths are from cancer, the increase due to a 1 rem exposure is impossible to detect
demographically. But 100 rem (1 Sv), which was the dose received by the average Hiroshima and Nagasaki survivor,
causes a 3 percent risk, which can be observed in the presence of a 20 percent normal or natural incidence rate.
The incidence of genetic defects induced by radiation is about one-third that of cancer deaths, but is much more
poorly known. The lifetime risk of a genetic defect due to a 1 rem exposure is about 100 in a million or
2 Multiply by 100 to obtain dose in rem.
PAGE: 1450
1432 32 • Medical Applications of Nuclear Physics
, but the normal incidence is 60,000 in a million. Evidence of such a small increase, tragic as it is, is
nearly impossible to obtain. For example, there is no evidence of increased genetic defects among the offspring of
Hiroshima and Nagasaki survivors. Animal studies do not seem to correlate well with effects on humans and are not
very helpful. For both cancer and genetic defects, the approach to safety has been to use the linear hypothesis,
which is likely to be an overestimate of the risks of low doses. Certain researchers even claim that low doses are
beneficial.Hormesisis a term used to describe generally favorable biological responses to low exposures of toxins
or radiation. Such low levels may help certain repair mechanisms to develop or enable cells to adapt to the effects of
the low exposures. Positive effects may occur at low doses that could be a problem at high doses.
Even the linear hypothesis estimates of the risks are relatively small, and the average person is not exposed to large
amounts of radiation.Table 32.5lists average annual background radiation doses from natural and artificial sources
for Australia, the United States, Germany, and world-wide averages. Cosmic rays are partially shielded by the
atmosphere, and the dose depends upon altitude and latitude, but the average is about 0.40 mSv/y. A good example
of the variation of cosmic radiation dose with altitude comes from the airline industry. Monitored personnel show an
average of 2 mSv/y. A 12-hour flight might give you an exposure of 0.02 to 0.03 mSv.
Doses from the Earth itself are mainly due to the isotopes of uranium, thorium, and potassium, and vary greatly by
location. Some places have great natural concentrations of uranium and thorium, yielding doses ten times as high as
the average value. Internal doses come from foods and liquids that we ingest. Fertilizers containing phosphates
have potassium and uranium. So we are all a little radioactive. Carbon-14 has about 66 Bq/kg radioactivity whereas
fertilizers may have more than 3000 Bq/kg radioactivity. Medical and dental diagnostic exposures are mostly from x-
rays. It should be noted that x-ray doses tend to be localized and are becoming much smaller with improved
techniques.Table 32.6shows typical doses received during various diagnostic x-ray examinations. Note the large
dose from a CT scan. While CT scans only account for less than 20 percent of the x-ray procedures done today, they
account for about 50 percent of the annual dose received.
Radon is usually more pronounced underground and in buildings with low air exchange with the outside world.
Almost all soil contains some and , but radon is lower in mainly sedimentary soils and higher in granite
soils. Thus, the exposure to the public can vary greatly, even within short distances. Radon can diffuse from the soil
into homes, especially basements. The estimated exposure for is controversial. Recent studies indicate there
is more radon in homes than had been realized, and it is speculated that radon may be responsible for 20 percent of
lung cancers, being particularly hazardous to those who also smoke. Many countries have introduced limits on
allowable radon concentrations in indoor air, often requiring the measurement of radon concentrations in a house
prior to its sale. Ironically, it could be argued that the higher levels of radon exposure and their geographic
variability, taken with the lack of demographic evidence of any effects, means that low-level radiation isless
dangerous than previously thought.
Radiation Protection
Laws regulate radiation doses to which people can be exposed. The greatest occupational whole-body dose that is
allowed depends upon the country and is about 20 to 50 mSv/y and is rarely reached by medical and nuclear power
workers. Higher doses are allowed for the hands. Much lower doses are permitted for the reproductive organs and
the fetuses of pregnant women. Inadvertent doses to the public are limited to of occupational doses, except for
those caused by nuclear power, which cannot legally expose the public to more than of the occupational
limit or 0.05 mSv/y (5 mrem/y). This has been exceeded in the United States only at the time of the Three Mile
Island (TMI) accident in 1979. Chernobyl is another story. Extensive monitoring with a variety of radiation detectors
is performed to assure radiation safety. Increased ventilation in uranium mines has lowered the dose there to about
1 mSv/y.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1451
32.2 • Biological Effects of Ionizing Radiation 1433
Source Dose (mSv/y)3
Source Australia Germany United States World
Natural Radiation - external
Cosmic Rays 0.30 0.28 0.30 0.39
Soil, building materials 0.40 0.40 0.30 0.48
Radon gas 0.90 1.1 2.0 1.2
Natural Radiation - internal
0.24 0.28 0.40 0.29
Medical & Dental 0.80 0.90 0.53 0.40
TOTAL 2.6 3.0 3.5 2.8
TABLE32.5Background Radiation Sources and Average Doses
To physically limit radiation doses, we useshielding, increase thedistancefrom a source, and limit thetime of
exposure.
Figure 32.7illustrates how these are used to protect both the patient and the dental technician when an x-ray is
taken. Shielding absorbs radiation and can be provided by any material, including sufficient air. The greater the
distance from the source, the more the radiation spreads out. The less time a person is exposed to a given source,
the smaller is the dose received by the person. Doses from most medical diagnostics have decreased in recent years
due to faster films that require less exposure time.
FIGURE32.7A lead apron is placed over the dental patient and shielding surrounds the x-ray tube to limit exposure to tissue other than the
tissue that is being imaged. Fast films limit the time needed to obtain images, reducing exposure to the imaged tissue. The technician
stands a few meters away behind a lead-lined door with a lead glass window, reducing her occupational exposure.
3 Multiply by 100 to obtain dose in mrem/y.
PAGE: 1452
1434 32 • Medical Applications of Nuclear Physics
Procedure Effective dose (mSv)
Chest 0.02
Dental 0.01
Skull 0.07
Leg 0.02
Mammogram 0.40
Barium enema 7.0
Upper GI 3.0
CT head 2.0
CT abdomen 10.0
TABLE32.6Typical Doses Received
During Diagnostic X-ray Exams
Problem-Solving Strategy
You need to follow certain steps for dose calculations, which are
Step 1.Examine the situation to determine that a person is exposed to ionizing radiation.
Step 2.Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the problem (identify the unknowns).The most
straightforward problems ask for a dose calculation.
Step 3.Make a list of what is given or can be inferred from the problem as stated (identify the knowns).Look for
information on the type of radiation, the energy per event, the activity, and the mass of tissue affected.
Step 4.For dose calculations, you need to determine the energy deposited.This may take one or more steps,
depending on the given information.
Step 5.Divide the deposited energy by the mass of the affected tissue.Use units of joules for energy and kilograms
for mass. To calculate the dose in Gy, use the definition that 1 Gy = 1 J/kg.
Step 6.To calculate the dose in mSv, determine the RBE (QF) of the radiation.Recall that
.
Step 7.Check the answer to see if it is reasonable: Does it make sense?The dose should be consistent with the
numbers given in the text for diagnostic, occupational, and therapeutic exposures.
EXAMPLE 32.1
Dose from Inhaled Plutonium
Calculate the dose in rem/y for the lungs of a weapons plant employee who inhales and retains an activity of
in an accident. The mass of affected lung tissue is 2.00 kg, the plutonium decays by emission of a
5.23-MeV particle, and you may assume the higher value of the RBE for s fromTable 32.2.
Strategy
Dose in rem is defined by and . The energy deposited is divided by the mass of
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1453
32.2 • Biological Effects of Ionizing Radiation 1435
tissue affected and then multiplied by the RBE. The latter two quantities are given, and so the main task in this
example will be to find the energy deposited in one year. Since the activity of the source is given, we can calculate
the number of decays, multiply by the energy per decay, and convert MeV to joules to get the total energy.
Solution
The activity decays/s. So, the number of decays per year is obtained
by multiplying by the number of seconds in a year:
32.7
Thus, the ionizing energy deposited per year is
32.8
Dividing by the mass of the affected tissue gives
32.9
One Gray is 1.00 J/kg, and so the dose in Gy is
32.10
Now, the dose in Sv is
32.11
32.12
Discussion
First note that the dose is given to two digits, because the RBE is (at best) known only to two digits. By any standard,
this yearly radiation dose is high and will have a devastating effect on the health of the worker. Worse yet, plutonium
has a long radioactive half-life and is not readily eliminated by the body, and so it will remain in the lungs. Being an
emitter makes the effects 10 to 20 times worse than the same ionization produced by s, rays, or x-rays. An
activity of is created by only of (left as an end-of-chapter problem to verify), partly justifying
claims that plutonium is the most toxic substance known. Its actual hazard depends on how likely it is to be spread
out among a large population and then ingested. The Chernobyl disaster’s deadly legacy, for example, has nothing to
do with the plutonium it put into the environment.
Risk versus Benefit
Medical doses of radiation are also limited. Diagnostic doses are generally low and have further lowered with
improved techniques and faster films. With the possible exception of routine dental x-rays, radiation is used
diagnostically only when needed so that the low risk is justified by the benefit of the diagnosis. Chest x-rays give the
lowest doses—about 0.1 mSv to the tissue affected, with less than 5 percent scattering into tissues that are not
directly imaged. Other x-ray procedures range upward to about 10 mSv in a CT scan, and about 5 mSv (0.5 rem) per
dental x-ray, again both only affecting the tissue imaged. Medical images with radiopharmaceuticals give doses
ranging from 1 to 5 mSv, usually localized. One exception is the thyroid scan using . Because of its relatively long
half-life, it exposes the thyroid to about 0.75 Sv. The isotope is more difficult to produce, but its short half-life
limits thyroid exposure to about 15 mSv.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Alpha Decay
Watch alpha particles escape from a polonium nucleus, causing radioactive alpha decay. See how random decay
PAGE: 1454
1436 32 • Medical Applications of Nuclear Physics
times relate to the half life.
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/l/02alphadecay).
32.3 Therapeutic Uses of Ionizing Radiation
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the concept of radiotherapy and list typical doses for cancer therapy.
Therapeutic applications of ionizing radiation, called radiation therapy orradiotherapy, have existed since the
discovery of x-rays and nuclear radioactivity. Today, radiotherapy is used almost exclusively for cancer therapy,
where it saves thousands of lives and improves the quality of life and longevity of many it cannot save. Radiotherapy
may be used alone or in combination with surgery and chemotherapy (drug treatment) depending on the type of
cancer and the response of the patient. A careful examination of all available data has established that
radiotherapy’s beneficial effects far outweigh its long-term risks.
Medical Application
The earliest uses of ionizing radiation on humans were mostly harmful, with many at the level of snake oil as seen in
Figure 32.8. Radium-doped cosmetics that glowed in the dark were used around the time of World War I. As
recently as the 1950s, radon mine tours were promoted as healthful and rejuvenating—those who toured were
exposed but gained no benefits. Radium salts were sold as health elixirs for many years. The gruesome death of a
wealthy industrialist, who became psychologically addicted to the brew, alerted the unsuspecting to the dangers of
radium salt elixirs. Most abuses finally ended after the legislation in the 1950s.
FIGURE32.8The properties of radiation were once touted for far more than its modern use in cancer therapy. Until 1932, radium was
advertised for a variety of uses, often with tragic results. (credit: Struthious Bandersnatch.)
Radiotherapy is effective against cancer because cancer cells reproduce rapidly and, consequently, are more
sensitive to radiation. The central problem in radiotherapy is to make the dose for cancer cells as high as possible
while limiting the dose for normal cells. The ratio of abnormal cells killed to normal cells killed is called the
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1455
32.3 • Therapeutic Uses of Ionizing Radiation 1437
therapeutic ratio, and all radiotherapy techniques are designed to enhance this ratio. Radiation can be
concentrated in cancerous tissue by a number of techniques. One of the most prevalent techniques for well-defined
tumors is a geometric technique shown inFigure 32.9. A narrow beam of radiation is passed through the patient
from a variety of directions with a common crossing point in the tumor. This concentrates the dose in the tumor
while spreading it out over a large volume of normal tissue. The external radiation can be x-rays, rays, or
ionizing-particle beams produced by accelerators. Accelerator-produced beams of neutrons, , and heavy
ions such as nitrogen nuclei have been employed, and these can be quite effective. These particles have larger QFs
or RBEs and sometimes can be better localized, producing a greater therapeutic ratio. But accelerator radiotherapy
is much more expensive and less frequently employed than other forms.
FIGURE32.9The source of -radiation is rotated around the patient so that the common crossing point is in the tumor, concentrating
the dose there. This geometric technique works for well-defined tumors.
Another form of radiotherapy uses chemically inert radioactive implants. One use is for prostate cancer. Radioactive
seeds (about 40 to 100 and the size of a grain of rice) are placed in the prostate region. The isotopes used are
usually (6-month half life) or (3-month half life). Alpha emitters have the dual advantages of a large QF
and a small range for better localization.
Radiopharmaceuticals are used for cancer therapy when they can be localized well enough to produce a favorable
therapeutic ratio. Thyroid cancer is commonly treated utilizing radioactive iodine. Thyroid cells concentrate iodine,
and cancerous thyroid cells are more aggressive in doing this. An ingenious use of radiopharmaceuticals in cancer
therapy tags antibodies with radioisotopes. Antibodies produced by a patient to combat his cancer are extracted,
cultured, loaded with a radioisotope, and then returned to the patient. The antibodies are concentrated almost
entirely in the tissue they developed to fight, thus localizing the radiation in abnormal tissue. The therapeutic ratio
can be quite high for short-range radiation. There is, however, a significant dose for organs that eliminate
radiopharmaceuticals from the body, such as the liver, kidneys, and bladder. As with most radiotherapy, the
technique is limited by the tolerable amount of damage to the normal tissue.
Table 32.7lists typical therapeutic doses of radiation used against certain cancers. The doses are large, but not fatal
because they are localized and spread out in time. Protocols for treatment vary with the type of cancer and the
condition and response of the patient. Three to five 200-rem treatments per week for a period of several weeks is
typical. Time between treatments allows the body to repair normal tissue. This effect occurs because damage is
concentrated in the abnormal tissue, and the abnormal tissue is more sensitive to radiation. Damage to normal
tissue limits the doses. You will note that the greatest doses are given to any tissue that is not rapidly reproducing,
such as in the adult brain. Lung cancer, on the other end of the scale, cannot ordinarily be cured with radiation
because of the sensitivity of lung tissue and blood to radiation. But radiotherapy for lung cancer does alleviate
symptoms and prolong life and is therefore justified in some cases.
PAGE: 1456
1438 32 • Medical Applications of Nuclear Physics
Type of Cancer Typical dose (Sv)
Lung 10–20
Hodgkin’s disease 40–45
Skin 40–50
Ovarian 50–75
Breast 50–80+
Brain 80+
Neck 80+
Bone 80+
Soft tissue 80+
Thyroid 80+
TABLE32.7Cancer Radiotherapy
Finally, it is interesting to note that chemotherapy employs drugs that interfere with cell division and is, thus, also
effective against cancer. It also has almost the same side effects, such as nausea and hair loss, and risks, such as
the inducement of another cancer.
32.4 Food Irradiation
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define food irradiation low dose, and free radicals.
Ionizing radiation is widely used to sterilize medical supplies, such as bandages, and consumer products, such as
tampons. Worldwide, it is also used to irradiate food, an application that promises to grow in the future.Food
irradiationis the treatment of food with ionizing radiation. It is used to reduce pest infestation and to delay spoilage
and prevent illness caused by microorganisms. Food irradiation is controversial. Proponents see it as superior to
pasteurization, preservatives, and insecticides, supplanting dangerous chemicals with a more effective process.
Opponents see its safety as unproven, perhaps leaving worse toxic residues as well as presenting an environmental
hazard at treatment sites. In developing countries, food irradiation might increase crop production by 25.0% or
more, and reduce food spoilage by a similar amount. It is used chiefly to treat spices and some fruits, and in some
countries, red meat, poultry, and vegetables. Over 40 countries have approved food irradiation at some level.
Food irradiation exposes food to large doses of rays, x-rays, or electrons. These photons and electrons induce no
nuclear reactions and thus createno residual radioactivity. (Some forms of ionizing radiation, such as neutron
irradiation, cause residual radioactivity. These are not used for food irradiation.) The source is usually or
, the latter isotope being a major by-product of nuclear power. Cobalt-60 rays average 1.25 MeV, while those
of are 0.67 MeV and are less penetrating. X-rays used for food irradiation are created with voltages of up to 5
million volts and, thus, have photon energies up to 5 MeV. Electrons used for food irradiation are accelerated to
energies up to 10 MeV. The higher the energy per particle, the more penetrating the radiation is and the more
ionization it can create.Figure 32.10shows a typical -irradiation plant.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1457
32.5 • Fusion 1439
FIGURE32.10A food irradiation plant has a conveyor system to pass items through an intense radiation field behind thick shielding walls.
The source is lowered into a deep pool of water for safe storage when not in use. Exposure times of up to an hour expose food to doses up
to .
Owing to the fact that food irradiation seeks to destroy organisms such as insects and bacteria, much larger doses
than those fatal to humans must be applied. Generally, the simpler the organism, the more radiation it can tolerate.
(Cancer cells are a partial exception, because they are rapidly reproducing and, thus, more sensitive.) Current
licensing allows up to 1000 Gy to be applied to fresh fruits and vegetables, called alow dosein food irradiation.
Such a dose is enough to prevent or reduce the growth of many microorganisms, but about 10,000 Gy is needed to
kill salmonella, and even more is needed to kill fungi. Doses greater than 10,000 Gy are considered to be high doses
in food irradiation and product sterilization.
The effectiveness of food irradiation varies with the type of food. Spices and many fruits and vegetables have
dramatically longer shelf lives. These also show no degradation in taste and no loss of food value or vitamins. If not
for the mandatory labeling, such foods subjected to low-level irradiation (up to 1000 Gy) could not be distinguished
from untreated foods in quality. However, some foods actually spoil faster after irradiation, particularly those with
high water content like lettuce and peaches. Others, such as milk, are given a noticeably unpleasant taste. High-
level irradiation produces significant and chemically measurable changes in foods. It produces about a 15% loss of
nutrients and a 25% loss of vitamins, as well as some change in taste. Such losses are similar to those that occur in
ordinary freezing and cooking.
How does food irradiation work? Ionization produces a random assortment of broken molecules and ions, some with
unstable oxygen- or hydrogen-containing molecules known asfree radicals. These undergo rapid chemical
reactions, producing perhaps four or five thousand different compounds calledradiolytic products, some of which
make cell function impossible by breaking cell membranes, fracturing DNA, and so on. How safe is the food
afterward? Critics argue that the radiolytic products present a lasting hazard, perhaps being carcinogenic. However,
the safety of irradiated food is not known precisely. We do know that low-level food irradiation produces no
compounds in amounts that can be measured chemically. This is not surprising, since trace amounts of several
thousand compounds may be created. We also know that there have been no observable negative short-term
effects on consumers. Long-term effects may show up if large number of people consume large quantities of
irradiated food, but no effects have appeared due to the small amounts of irradiated food that are consumed
regularly. The case for safety is supported by testing of animal diets that were irradiated; no transmitted genetic
effects have been observed. Food irradiation (at least up to a million rad) has been endorsed by the World Health
Organization and the UN Food and Agricultural Organization. Finally, the hazard to consumers, if it exists, must be
weighed against the benefits in food production and preservation. It must also be weighed against the very real
hazards of existing insecticides and food preservatives.
32.5 Fusion
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define nuclear fusion.
• Discuss processes to achieve practical fusion energy generation.
While basking in the warmth of the summer sun, a student reads of the latest breakthrough in achieving sustained
PAGE: 1458
1440 32 • Medical Applications of Nuclear Physics
thermonuclear power and vaguely recalls hearing about the cold fusion controversy. The three are connected. The
Sun’s energy is produced by nuclear fusion (seeFigure 32.11). Thermonuclear power is the name given to the use of
controlled nuclear fusion as an energy source. While research in the area of thermonuclear power is progressing,
high temperatures and containment difficulties remain. The cold fusion controversy centered around
unsubstantiated claims of practical fusion power at room temperatures.
FIGURE32.11The Sun’s energy is produced by nuclear fusion. (credit: Spiralz)
Nuclear fusionis a reaction in which two nuclei are combined, orfused, to form a larger nucleus. We know that all
nuclei have less mass than the sum of the masses of the protons and neutrons that form them. The missing mass
times equals the binding energy of the nucleus—the greater the binding energy, the greater the missing mass. We
also know that , the binding energy per nucleon, is greater for medium-mass nuclei and has a maximum at Fe
(iron). This means that if two low-mass nuclei can be fused together to form a larger nucleus, energy can be
released. The larger nucleus has a greater binding energy and less mass per nucleon than the two that combined.
Thus mass is destroyed in the fusion reaction, and energy is released (seeFigure 32.12). On average, fusion of low-
mass nuclei releases energy, but the details depend on the actual nuclides involved.
FIGURE32.12Fusion of light nuclei to form medium-mass nuclei destroys mass, because is greater for the product nuclei. The larger
is, the less mass per nucleon, and so mass is converted to energy and released in these fusion reactions.
The major obstruction to fusion is the Coulomb repulsion between nuclei. Since the attractive nuclear force that can
fuse nuclei together is short ranged, the repulsion of like positive charges must be overcome to get nuclei close
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1459
32.5 • Fusion 1441
enough to induce fusion.Figure 32.13shows an approximate graph of the potential energy between two nuclei as a
function of the distance between their centers. The graph is analogous to a hill with a well in its center. A ball rolled
from the right must have enough kinetic energy to get over the hump before it falls into the deeper well with a net
gain in energy. So it is with fusion. If the nuclei are given enough kinetic energy to overcome the electric potential
energy due to repulsion, then they can combine, release energy, and fall into a deep well. One way to accomplish
this is to heat fusion fuel to high temperatures so that the kinetic energy of thermal motion is sufficient to get the
nuclei together.
FIGURE32.13Potential energy between two light nuclei graphed as a function of distance between them. If the nuclei have enough kinetic
energy to get over the Coulomb repulsion hump, they combine, release energy, and drop into a deep attractive well. Tunneling through the
barrier is important in practice. The greater the kinetic energy and the higher the particles get up the barrier (or the lower the barrier), the
more likely the tunneling.
You might think that, in the core of our Sun, nuclei are coming into contact and fusing. However, in fact,
temperatures on the order of are needed to actually get the nuclei in contact, exceeding the core temperature
of the Sun. Quantum mechanical tunneling is what makes fusion in the Sun possible, and tunneling is an important
process in most other practical applications of fusion, too. Since the probability of tunneling is extremely sensitive to
barrier height and width, increasing the temperature greatly increases the rate of fusion. The closer reactants get to
one another, the more likely they are to fuse (seeFigure 32.14). Thus most fusion in the Sun and other stars takes
place at their centers, where temperatures are highest. Moreover, high temperature is needed for thermonuclear
power to be a practical source of energy.
FIGURE32.14(a) Two nuclei heading toward each other slow down, then stop, and then fly away without touching or fusing. (b) At higher
energies, the two nuclei approach close enough for fusion via tunneling. The probability of tunneling increases as they approach, but they
do not have to touch for the reaction to occur.
The Sun produces energy by fusing protons or hydrogen nuclei (by far the Sun’s most abundant nuclide) into
helium nuclei . The principal sequence of fusion reactions forms what is called theproton-proton cycle:
32.13
32.14
32.15
where stands for a positron and is an electron neutrino. (The energy in parentheses isreleasedby the
reaction.) Note that the first two reactions must occur twice for the third to be possible, so that the cycle consumes
six protons ( ) but gives back two. Furthermore, the two positrons produced will find two electrons and annihilate
to form four more rays, for a total of six. The overall effect of the cycle is thus
PAGE: 1460
1442 32 • Medical Applications of Nuclear Physics
32.16
where the 26.7 MeV includes the annihilation energy of the positrons and electrons and is distributed among all the
reaction products. The solar interior is dense, and the reactions occur deep in the Sun where temperatures are
highest. It takes about 32,000 years for the energy to diffuse to the surface and radiate away. However, the
neutrinos escape the Sun in less than two seconds, carrying their energy with them, because they interact so weakly
that the Sun is transparent to them. Negative feedback in the Sun acts as a thermostat to regulate the overall energy
output. For instance, if the interior of the Sun becomes hotter than normal, the reaction rate increases, producing
energy that expands the interior. This cools it and lowers the reaction rate. Conversely, if the interior becomes too
cool, it contracts, increasing the temperature and reaction rate (seeFigure 32.15). Stars like the Sun are stable for
billions of years, until a significant fraction of their hydrogen has been depleted. What happens then is discussed in
Introduction to Frontiers of Physics.
FIGURE32.15Nuclear fusion in the Sun converts hydrogen nuclei into helium; fusion occurs primarily at the boundary of the helium core,
where temperature is highest and sufficient hydrogen remains. Energy released diffuses slowly to the surface, with the exception of
neutrinos, which escape immediately. Energy production remains stable because of negative feedback effects.
Theories of the proton-proton cycle (and other energy-producing cycles in stars) were pioneered by the German-
born, American physicist Hans Bethe (1906–2005), starting in 1938. He was awarded the 1967 Nobel Prize in
physics for this work, and he has made many other contributions to physics and society. Neutrinos produced in
these cycles escape so readily that they provide us an excellent means to test these theories and study stellar
interiors. Detectors have been constructed and operated for more than four decades now to measure solar
neutrinos (seeFigure 32.16). Although solar neutrinos are detected and neutrinos were observed from Supernova
1987A (Figure 32.17), too few solar neutrinos were observed to be consistent with predictions of solar energy
production. After many years, this solar neutrino problem was resolved with a blend of theory and experiment that
showed that the neutrino does indeed have mass. It was also found that there are three types of neutrinos, each
associated with a different type of nuclear decay.
FIGURE32.16This array of photomultiplier tubes is part of the large solar neutrino detector at the Fermi National Accelerator Laboratory in
Illinois. In these experiments, the neutrinos interact with heavy water and produce flashes of light, which are detected by the
photomultiplier tubes. In spite of its size and the huge flux of neutrinos that strike it, very few are detected each day since they interact so
weakly. This, of course, is the same reason they escape the Sun so readily. (credit: Fred Ullrich)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1461
32.5 • Fusion 1443
FIGURE32.17Supernovas are the source of elements heavier than iron. Energy released powers nucleosynthesis. Spectroscopic analysis
of the ring of material ejected by Supernova 1987A observable in the southern hemisphere, shows evidence of heavy elements. The study
of this supernova also provided indications that neutrinos might have mass. (credit: NASA, ESA, and P. Challis)
The proton-proton cycle is not a practical source of energy on Earth, in spite of the great abundance of hydrogen
( ). The reaction has a very low probability of occurring. (This is why our Sun will last
for about ten billion years.) However, a number of other fusion reactions are easier to induce. Among them are:
32.17
32.18
32.19
32.20
Deuterium ( ) is about 0.015% of natural hydrogen, so there is an immense amount of it in sea water alone. In
addition to an abundance of deuterium fuel, these fusion reactions produce large energies per reaction (in
parentheses), but they do not produce much radioactive waste. Tritium ( ) is radioactive, but it is consumed as a
fuel (the reaction ), and the neutrons and s can be shielded. The neutrons produced can also
be used to create more energy and fuel in reactions like
32.21
and
32.22
Note that these last two reactions, and , put most of their energy output into the ray, and
such energy is difficult to utilize.
The three keys to practical fusion energy generation are to achieve the temperatures necessary to make the
reactions likely, to raise the density of the fuel, and to confine it long enough to produce large amounts of energy.
These three factors—temperature, density, and time—complement one another, and so a deficiency in one can be
compensated for by the others.Ignitionis defined to occur when the reactions produce enough energy to be self-
sustaining after external energy input is cut off. This goal, which must be reached before commercial plants can be a
reality, has not been achieved. Another milestone, calledbreak-even, occurs when the fusion power produced
equals the heating power input. Break-even has nearly been reached and gives hope that ignition and commercial
plants may become a reality in a few decades.
Two techniques have shown considerable promise. The first of these is calledmagnetic confinementand uses the
property that charged particles have difficulty crossing magnetic field lines. The tokamak, shown inFigure 32.18,
has shown particular promise. The tokamak’s toroidal coil confines charged particles into a circular path with a
helical twist due to the circulating ions themselves. In 1995, the Tokamak Fusion Test Reactor at Princeton in the US
achieved world-record plasma temperatures as high as 500 million degrees Celsius. This facility operated between
1982 and 1997. A joint international effort is underway in France to build a tokamak-type reactor that will be the
stepping stone to commercial power. ITER, as it is called, will be a full-scale device that aims to demonstrate the
feasibility of fusion energy. It will generate 500 MW of power for extended periods of time and will achieve break-
PAGE: 1462
1444 32 • Medical Applications of Nuclear Physics
even conditions. It will study plasmas in conditions similar to those expected in a fusion power plant. Completion is
scheduled for 2018.
FIGURE32.18(a) Artist’s rendition of ITER, a tokamak-type fusion reactor being built in southern France. It is hoped that this gigantic
machine will reach the break-even point. Completion is scheduled for 2018. (credit: Stephan Mosel, Flickr)
The second promising technique aims multiple lasers at tiny fuel pellets filled with a mixture of deuterium and
tritium. Huge power input heats the fuel, evaporating the confining pellet and crushing the fuel to high density with
the expanding hot plasma produced. This technique is calledinertial confinement, because the fuel’s inertia
prevents it from escaping before significant fusion can take place. Higher densities have been reached than with
tokamaks, but with smaller confinement times. In 2009, the Lawrence Livermore Laboratory (CA) completed a laser
fusion device with 192 ultraviolet laser beams that are focused upon a D-T pellet (seeFigure 32.19).
FIGURE32.19National Ignition Facility (CA). This image shows a laser bay where 192 laser beams will focus onto a small D-T target,
producing fusion. (credit: Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC, and the Department of
Energy)
EXAMPLE 32.2
Calculating Energy and Power from Fusion
(a) Calculate the energy released by the fusion of a 1.00-kg mixture of deuterium and tritium, which produces
helium. There are equal numbers of deuterium and tritium nuclei in the mixture.
(b) If this takes place continuously over a period of a year, what is the average power output?
Strategy
According to , the energy per reaction is 17.59 MeV. To find the total energy released, we must
find the number of deuterium and tritium atoms in a kilogram. Deuterium has an atomic mass of about 2 and tritium
has an atomic mass of about 3, for a total of about 5 g per mole of reactants or about 200 mol in 1.00 kg. To get a
more precise figure, we will use the atomic masses from Appendix A. The power output is best expressed in watts,
and so the energy output needs to be calculated in joules and then divided by the number of seconds in a year.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1463
32.6 • Fission 1445
Solution for (a)
The atomic mass of deuterium ( ) is 2.014102 u, while that of tritium ( ) is 3.016049 u, for a total of 5.032151 u
per reaction. So a mole of reactants has a mass of 5.03 g, and in 1.00 kg there are
. The number of reactions that take place is therefore
32.23
The total energy output is the number of reactions times the energy per reaction:
32.24
Solution for (b)
Power is energy per unit time. One year has , so
32.25
Discussion
By now we expect nuclear processes to yield large amounts of energy, and we are not disappointed here. The energy
output of from fusing 1.00 kg of deuterium and tritium is equivalent to 2.6 million gallons of gasoline
and about eight times the energy output of the bomb that destroyed Hiroshima. Yet the average backyard swimming
pool has about 6 kg of deuterium in it, so that fuel is plentiful if it can be utilized in a controlled manner. The average
power output over a year is more than 10 MW, impressive but a bit small for a commercial power plant. About 32
times this power output would allow generation of 100 MW of electricity, assuming an efficiency of one-third in
converting the fusion energy to electrical energy.
32.6 Fission
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define nuclear fission.
• Discuss how fission fuel reacts and describe what it produces.
• Describe controlled and uncontrolled chain reactions.
Nuclear fissionis a reaction in which a nucleus is split (orfissured). Controlled fission is a reality, whereas
controlled fusion is a hope for the future. Hundreds of nuclear fission power plants around the world attest to the
fact that controlled fission is practical and, at least in the short term, economical, as seen inFigure 32.20. Whereas
nuclear power was of little interest for decades following TMI and Chernobyl (and now Fukushima Daiichi), growing
concerns over global warming has brought nuclear power back on the table as a viable energy alternative. By the
end of 2009, there were 442 reactors operating in 30 countries, providing 15% of the world’s electricity. France
provides over 75% of its electricity with nuclear power, while the US has 104 operating reactors providing 20% of its
electricity. Australia and New Zealand have none. China is building nuclear power plants at the rate of one start
every month.
PAGE: 1464
1446 32 • Medical Applications of Nuclear Physics
FIGURE32.20The people living near this nuclear power plant have no measurable exposure to radiation that is traceable to the plant.
About 16% of the world’s electrical power is generated by controlled nuclear fission in such plants. The cooling towers are the most
prominent features but are not unique to nuclear power. The reactor is in the small domed building to the left of the towers. (credit:
Kalmthouts)
Fission is the opposite of fusion and releases energy only when heavy nuclei are split. As noted inFusion, energy is
released if the products of a nuclear reaction have a greater binding energy per nucleon ( ) than the parent
nuclei.Figure 32.21shows that is greater for medium-mass nuclei than heavy nuclei, implying that when a
heavy nucleus is split, the products have less mass per nucleon, so that mass is destroyed and energy is released in
the reaction. The amount of energy per fission reaction can be large, even by nuclear standards. The graph inFigure
32.21shows to be about 7.6 MeV/nucleon for the heaviest nuclei ( about 240), while is about 8.6
MeV/nucleon for nuclei having about 120. Thus, if a heavy nucleus splits in half, then about 1 MeV per nucleon, or
approximately 240 MeV per fission, is released. This is about 10 times the energy per fusion reaction, and about 100
times the energy of the average , , or decay.
EXAMPLE 32.3
Calculating Energy Released by Fission
Calculate the energy released in the following spontaneous fission reaction:
32.26
given the atomic masses to be , , , and
.
Strategy
As always, the energy released is equal to the mass destroyed times , so we must find the difference in mass
between the parent and the fission products.
Solution
The products have a total mass of
32.27
The mass lost is the mass of minus , or
32.28
so the energy released is
32.29
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1465
32.6 • Fission 1447
Discussion
A number of important things arise in this example. The 171-MeV energy released is large, but a little less than the
earlier estimated 240 MeV. This is because this fission reaction produces neutrons and does not split the nucleus
into two equal parts. Fission of a given nuclide, such as , does not always produce the same products. Fission
is a statistical process in which an entire range of products are produced with various probabilities. Most fission
produces neutrons, although the number varies with each fission. This is an extremely important aspect of fission,
becauseneutrons can induce more fission, enabling self-sustaining chain reactions.
Spontaneous fission can occur, but this is usually not the most common decay mode for a given nuclide. For
example, can spontaneously fission, but it decays mostly by emission. Neutron-induced fission is crucial as
seen inFigure 32.21. Being chargeless, even low-energy neutrons can strike a nucleus and be absorbed once they
feel the attractive nuclear force. Large nuclei are described by aliquid drop modelwith surface tension and
oscillation modes, because the large number of nucleons act like atoms in a drop. The neutron is attracted and thus,
deposits energy, causing the nucleus to deform as a liquid drop. If stretched enough, the nucleus narrows in the
middle. The number of nucleons in contact and the strength of the nuclear force binding the nucleus together are
reduced. Coulomb repulsion between the two ends then succeeds in fissioning the nucleus, which pops like a water
drop into two large pieces and a few neutrons.Neutron-induced fissioncan be written as
32.30
where and are the two daughter nuclei, calledfission fragments, and is the number of neutrons
produced. Most often, the masses of the fission fragments are not the same. Most of the released energy goes into
the kinetic energy of the fission fragments, with the remainder going into the neutrons and excited states of the
fragments. Since neutrons can induce fission, a self-sustaining chain reaction is possible, provided more than one
neutron is produced on average — that is, if in . This can also be seen inFigure
32.22.
An example of a typical neutron-induced fission reaction is
32.31
Note that in this equation, the total charge remains the same (is conserved): . Also, as far as
whole numbers are concerned, the mass is constant: . This is not true when we consider
the masses out to 6 or 7 significant places, as in the previous example.
PAGE: 1466
1448 32 • Medical Applications of Nuclear Physics
FIGURE32.21Neutron-induced fission is shown. First, energy is put into this large nucleus when it absorbs a neutron. Acting like a struck
liquid drop, the nucleus deforms and begins to narrow in the middle. Since fewer nucleons are in contact, the repulsive Coulomb force is
able to break the nucleus into two parts with some neutrons also flying away.
FIGURE32.22A chain reaction can produce self-sustained fission if each fission produces enough neutrons to induce at least one more
fission. This depends on several factors, including how many neutrons are produced in an average fission and how easy it is to make a
particular type of nuclide fission.
Not every neutron produced by fission induces fission. Some neutrons escape the fissionable material, while others
interact with a nucleus without making it fission. We can enhance the number of fissions produced by neutrons by
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1467
32.6 • Fission 1449
having a large amount of fissionable material. The minimum amount necessary for self-sustained fission of a given
nuclide is called itscritical mass. Some nuclides, such as , produce more neutrons per fission than others,
such as . Additionally, some nuclides are easier to make fission than others. In particular, and are
easier to fission than the much more abundant . Both factors affect critical mass, which is smallest for .
The reason and are easier to fission than is that the nuclear force is more attractive for an even
number of neutrons in a nucleus than for an odd number. Consider that has 143 neutrons, and has
145 neutrons, whereas has 146. When a neutron encounters a nucleus with an odd number of neutrons,
the nuclear force is more attractive, because the additional neutron will make the number even. About 2-MeV more
energy is deposited in the resulting nucleus than would be the case if the number of neutrons was already even. This
extra energy produces greater deformation, making fission more likely. Thus, and are superior fission
fuels. The isotope is only 0.72 % of natural uranium, while is 99.27%, and does not exist in
nature. Australia has the largest deposits of uranium in the world, standing at 28% of the total. This is followed by
Kazakhstan and Canada. The US has only 3% of global reserves.
Most fission reactors utilize , which is separated from at some expense. This is called enrichment. The
most common separation method is gaseous diffusion of uranium hexafluoride ( ) through membranes. Since
has less mass than , its molecules have higher average velocity at the same temperature and
diffuse faster. Another interesting characteristic of is that it preferentially absorbs very slow moving neutrons
(with energies a fraction of an eV), whereas fission reactions produce fast neutrons with energies in the order of an
MeV. To make a self-sustained fission reactor with , it is thus necessary to slow down (“thermalize”) the
neutrons. Water is very effective, since neutrons collide with protons in water molecules and lose energy.Figure
32.23shows a schematic of a reactor design, called the pressurized water reactor.
FIGURE32.23A pressurized water reactor is cleverly designed to control the fission of large amounts of , while using the heat
produced in the fission reaction to create steam for generating electrical energy. Control rods adjust neutron flux so that criticality is
obtained, but not exceeded. In case the reactor overheats and boils the water away, the chain reaction terminates, because water is
needed to thermalize the neutrons. This inherent safety feature can be overwhelmed in extreme circumstances.
Control rods containing nuclides that very strongly absorb neutrons are used to adjust neutron flux. To produce large
power, reactors contain hundreds to thousands of critical masses, and the chain reaction easily becomes self-
sustaining, a condition calledcriticality. Neutron flux should be carefully regulated to avoid an exponential increase
in fissions, a condition calledsupercriticality. Control rods help prevent overheating, perhaps even a meltdown or
explosive disassembly. The water that is used to thermalize neutrons, necessary to get them to induce fission in
, and achieve criticality, provides a negative feedback for temperature increases. In case the reactor overheats
PAGE: 1468
1450 32 • Medical Applications of Nuclear Physics
and boils the water to steam or is breached, the absence of water kills the chain reaction. Considerable heat,
however, can still be generated by the reactor’s radioactive fission products. Other safety features, thus, need to be
incorporated in the event of aloss of coolantaccident, including auxiliary cooling water and pumps.
EXAMPLE 32.4
Calculating Energy from a Kilogram of Fissionable Fuel
Calculate the amount of energy produced by the fission of 1.00 kg of , given the average fission reaction of
produces 200 MeV.
Strategy
The total energy produced is the number of atoms times the given energy per fission. We should
therefore find the number of atoms in 1.00 kg.
Solution
The number of atoms in 1.00 kg is Avogadro’s number times the number of moles. One mole of has a
mass of 235.04 g; thus, there are . The number of atoms is therefore,
32.32
So the total energy released is
32.33
Discussion
This is another impressively large amount of energy, equivalent to about 14,000 barrels of crude oil or 600,000
gallons of gasoline. But, it is only one-fourth the energy produced by the fusion of a kilogram mixture of deuterium
and tritium as seen inExample 32.2. Even though each fission reaction yields about ten times the energy of a fusion
reaction, the energy per kilogram of fission fuel is less, because there are far fewer moles per kilogram of the heavy
nuclides. Fission fuel is also much more scarce than fusion fuel, and less than 1% of uranium is readily
usable.
One nuclide already mentioned is , which has a 24,120-y half-life and does not exist in nature. Plutonium-239
is manufactured from in reactors, and it provides an opportunity to utilize the other 99% of natural uranium as
an energy source. The following reaction sequence, calledbreeding, produces . Breeding begins with neutron
capture by :
32.34
Uranium-239 then decays:
32.35
Neptunium-239 also decays:
32.36
Plutonium-239 builds up in reactor fuel at a rate that depends on the probability of neutron capture by (all
reactor fuel contains more than ). Reactors designed specifically to make plutonium are calledbreeder
reactors. They seem to be inherently more hazardous than conventional reactors, but it remains unknown whether
their hazards can be made economically acceptable. The four reactors at Chernobyl, including the one that was
destroyed, were built to breed plutonium and produce electricity. These reactors had a design that was significantly
different from the pressurized water reactor illustrated above.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1469
32.7 • Nuclear Weapons 1451
Plutonium-239 has advantages over as a reactor fuel — it produces more neutrons per fission on average, and
it is easier for a thermal neutron to cause it to fission. It is also chemically different from uranium, so it is inherently
easier to separate from uranium ore. This means has a particularly small critical mass, an advantage for
nuclear weapons.
PHET EXPLORATIONS
Nuclear Fission
Start a chain reaction, or introduce non-radioactive isotopes to prevent one. Control energy production in a nuclear
reactor!
Click to view content(https://openstax.org/l/16fission).
32.7 Nuclear Weapons
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Discuss different types of fission and thermonuclear bombs.
• Explain the ill effects of nuclear explosion.
The world was in turmoil when fission was discovered in 1938. The discovery of fission, made by two German
physicists, Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassman, was quickly verified by two Jewish refugees from Nazi Germany, Lise
Meitner and her nephew Otto Frisch. Fermi, among others, soon found that not only did neutrons induce fission;
more neutrons were produced during fission. The possibility of a self-sustained chain reaction was immediately
recognized by leading scientists the world over. The enormous energy known to be in nuclei, but considered
inaccessible, now seemed to be available on a large scale.
Within months after the announcement of the discovery of fission, Adolf Hitler banned the export of uranium from
newly occupied Czechoslovakia. It seemed that the military value of uranium had been recognized in Nazi Germany,
and that a serious effort to build a nuclear bomb had begun.
Alarmed scientists, many of them who fled Nazi Germany, decided to take action. None was more famous or revered
than Einstein. It was felt that his help was needed to get the American government to make a serious effort at
nuclear weapons as a matter of survival. Leo Szilard, an escaped Hungarian physicist, took a draft of a letter to
Einstein, who, although pacifistic, signed the final version. The letter was for President Franklin Roosevelt, warning
of the German potential to build extremely powerful bombs of a new type. It was sent in August of 1939, just before
the German invasion of Poland that marked the start of World War II.
It was not until December 6, 1941, the day before the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, that the United States made
a massive commitment to building a nuclear bomb. The top secret Manhattan Project was a crash program aimed at
beating the Germans. It was carried out in remote locations, such as Los Alamos, New Mexico, whenever possible,
and eventually came to cost billions of dollars and employ the efforts of more than 100,000 people. J. Robert
Oppenheimer (1904–1967), whose talent and ambitions made him ideal, was chosen to head the project. The first
major step was made by Enrico Fermi and his group in December 1942, when they achieved the first self-sustained
nuclear reactor. This first “atomic pile”, built in a squash court at the University of Chicago, used carbon blocks to
thermalize neutrons. It not only proved that the chain reaction was possible, it began the era of nuclear reactors.
Glenn Seaborg, an American chemist and physicist, received the Nobel Prize in physics in 1951 for discovery of
several transuranic elements, including plutonium. Carbon-moderated reactors are relatively inexpensive and
simple in design and are still used for breeding plutonium, such as at Chernobyl, where two such reactors remain in
operation.
Plutonium was recognized as easier to fission with neutrons and, hence, a superior fission material very early in the
Manhattan Project. Plutonium availability was uncertain, and so a uranium bomb was developed simultaneously.
Figure 32.24shows a gun-type bomb, which takes two subcritical uranium masses and blows them together. To get
an appreciable yield, the critical mass must be held together by the explosive charges inside the cannon barrel for a
PAGE: 1470
1452 32 • Medical Applications of Nuclear Physics
few microseconds. Since the buildup of the uranium chain reaction is relatively slow, the device to hold the critical
mass together can be relatively simple. Owing to the fact that the rate of spontaneous fission is low, a neutron
source is triggered at the same time the critical mass is assembled.
FIGURE32.24A gun-type fission bomb for utilizes two subcritical masses forced together by explosive charges inside a cannon
barrel. The energy yield depends on the amount of uranium and the time it can be held together before it disassembles itself.
Plutonium’s special properties necessitated a more sophisticated critical mass assembly, shown schematically in
Figure 32.25. A spherical mass of plutonium is surrounded by shape charges (high explosives that release most of
their blast in one direction) that implode the plutonium, crushing it into a smaller volume to form a critical mass. The
implosion technique is faster and more effective, because it compresses three-dimensionally rather than one-
dimensionally as in the gun-type bomb. Again, a neutron source must be triggered at just the correct time to initiate
the chain reaction.
FIGURE32.25An implosion created by high explosives compresses a sphere of into a critical mass. The superior fissionability of
plutonium has made it the universal bomb material.
Owing to its complexity, the plutonium bomb needed to be tested before there could be any attempt to use it. On
July 16, 1945, the test named Trinity was conducted in the isolated Alamogordo Desert about 200 miles south of
Los Alamos (seeFigure 32.26). A new age had begun. The yield of this device was about 10 kilotons (kT), the
equivalent of 5000 of the largest conventional bombs.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1471
32.7 • Nuclear Weapons 1453
FIGURE32.26Trinity test (1945), the first nuclear bomb (credit: United States Department of Energy)
Although Germany surrendered on May 7, 1945, Japan had been steadfastly refusing to surrender for many months,
forcing large casualties. Invasion plans by the Allies estimated a million casualties of their own and untold losses of
Japanese lives. The bomb was viewed as a way to end the war. The first was a uranium bomb dropped on Hiroshima
on August 6. Its yield of about 15 kT destroyed the city and killed an estimated 80,000 people, with 100,000 more
being seriously injured (seeFigure 32.27). The second was a plutonium bomb dropped on Nagasaki only three days
later, on August 9. Its 20 kT yield killed at least 50,000 people, something less than Hiroshima because of the hilly
terrain and the fact that it was a few kilometers off target. The Japanese were told that one bomb a week would be
dropped until they surrendered unconditionally, which they did on August 14. In actuality, the United States had
only enough plutonium for one more and as yet unassembled bomb.
FIGURE32.27Destruction in Hiroshima (credit: United States Federal Government)
Knowing that fusion produces several times more energy per kilogram of fuel than fission, some scientists pushed
the idea of a fusion bomb starting very early on. Calling this bomb the Super, they realized that it could have another
advantage over fission—high-energy neutrons would aid fusion, while they are ineffective in fission. Thus the
fusion bomb could be virtually unlimited in energy release. The first such bomb was detonated by the United States
on October 31, 1952, at Eniwetok Atoll with a yield of 10 megatons (MT), about 670 times that of the fission bomb
that destroyed Hiroshima. The USSR followed with a fusion device of their own in August 1953, and a weapons race,
beyond the aim of this text to discuss, continued until the end of the Cold War.
Figure 32.28shows a simple diagram of how a thermonuclear bomb is constructed. A fission bomb is exploded next
to fusion fuel in the solid form of lithium deuteride. Before the shock wave blows it apart, rays heat and compress
the fuel, and neutrons create tritium through the reaction . Additional fusion and fission fuels
are enclosed in a dense shell of . The shell reflects some of the neutrons back into the fuel to enhance its
fusion, but at high internal temperatures fast neutrons are created that also cause the plentiful and inexpensive
to fission, part of what allows thermonuclear bombs to be so large.
PAGE: 1472
1454 32 • Medical Applications of Nuclear Physics
FIGURE32.28This schematic of a fusion bomb (H-bomb) gives some idea of how the fission trigger is used to ignite fusion fuel.
Neutrons and rays transmit energy to the fusion fuel, create tritium from deuterium, and heat and compress the fusion fuel. The outer
shell of serves to reflect some neutrons back into the fuel, causing more fusion, and it boosts the energy output by fissioning itself
when neutron energies become high enough.
The energy yield and the types of energy produced by nuclear bombs can be varied. Energy yields in current
arsenals range from about 0.1 kT to 20 MT, although the USSR once detonated a 67 MT device. Nuclear bombs differ
from conventional explosives in more than size.Figure 32.29shows the approximate fraction of energy output in
various forms for conventional explosives and for two types of nuclear bombs. Nuclear bombs put a much larger
fraction of their output into thermal energy than do conventional bombs, which tend to concentrate the energy in
blast. Another difference is the immediate and residual radiation energy from nuclear weapons. This can be
adjusted to put more energy into radiation (the so-called neutron bomb) so that the bomb can be used to irradiate
advancing troops without killing friendly troops with blast and heat.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1473
32.7 • Nuclear Weapons 1455
FIGURE32.29Approximate fractions of energy output by conventional and two types of nuclear weapons. In addition to yielding more
energy than conventional weapons, nuclear bombs put a much larger fraction into thermal energy. This can be adjusted to enhance the
radiation output to be more effective against troops. An enhanced radiation bomb is also called a neutron bomb.
At its peak in 1986, the combined arsenals of the United States and the Soviet Union totaled about 60,000 nuclear
warheads. In addition, the British, French, and Chinese each have several hundred bombs of various sizes, and a few
other countries have a small number. Nuclear weapons are generally divided into two categories. Strategic nuclear
weapons are those intended for military targets, such as bases and missile complexes, and moderate to large cities.
There were about 20,000 strategic weapons in 1988. Tactical weapons are intended for use in smaller battles. Since
the collapse of the Soviet Union and the end of the Cold War in 1989, most of the 32,000 tactical weapons
(including Cruise missiles, artillery shells, land mines, torpedoes, depth charges, and backpacks) have been
demobilized, and parts of the strategic weapon systems are being dismantled with warheads and missiles being
disassembled. According to the Treaty of Moscow of 2002, Russia and the United States have been required to
reduce their strategic nuclear arsenal down to about 2000 warheads each.
A few small countries have built or are capable of building nuclear bombs, as are some terrorist groups. Two things
are needed—a minimum level of technical expertise and sufficient fissionable material. The first is easy. Fissionable
material is controlled but is also available. There are international agreements and organizations that attempt to
control nuclear proliferation, but it is increasingly difficult given the availability of fissionable material and the small
amount needed for a crude bomb. The production of fissionable fuel itself is technologically difficult. However, the
presence of large amounts of such material worldwide, though in the hands of a few, makes control and
PAGE: 1474
1456 32 • Medical Applications of Nuclear Physics
accountability crucial.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1475
32 • Glossary 1457
Glossary
Anger camera a common medical imaging device moderate dose a dose from 0.1 Sv to 1 Sv (10 to 100
that uses a scintillator connected to a series of rem)
photomultipliers neutron-induced fission fission that is initiated after
break-even when fusion power produced equals the the absorption of neutron
heating power input nuclear fission reaction in which a nucleus splits
breeder reactors reactors that are designed nuclear fusion a reaction in which two nuclei are
specifically to make plutonium combined, or fused, to form a larger nucleus
breeding reaction process that produces239Pu positron emission tomography (PET) tomography
critical mass minimum amount necessary for self- technique that uses emitters and detects the
sustained fission of a given nuclide two annihilation rays, aiding in source localization
criticality condition in which a chain reaction easily proton-proton cycle the combined reactions
becomes self-sustaining 1H+1H→2H+e++v,1H+2H→3He+γ, and
e
fission fragments a daughter nuclei 3He+3He→4He+1H+1H
food irradiation treatment of food with ionizing quality factor same as relative biological
radiation effectiveness
free radicals ions with unstable oxygen- or hydrogen- rad the ionizing energy deposited per kilogram of
containing molecules tissue
gamma camera another name for an Anger camera radiolytic products compounds produced due to
gray (Gy) the SI unit for radiation dose which is chemical reactions of free radicals
defined to be radiopharmaceutical compound used for medical
high dose a dose greater than 1 Sv (100 rem) imaging
hormesis a term used to describe generally favorable radiotherapy the use of ionizing radiation to treat
biological responses to low exposures of toxins or ailments
radiation relative biological effectiveness (RBE) a number
ignition when a fusion reaction produces enough that expresses the relative amount of damage that a
energy to be self-sustaining after external energy fixed amount of ionizing radiation of a given type can
input is cut off inflict on biological tissues
inertial confinement a technique that aims multiple roentgen equivalent man (rem) a dose unit more
lasers at tiny fuel pellets evaporating and crushing closely related to effects in biological tissue
them to high density shielding a technique to limit radiation exposure
linear hypothesis assumption that risk is directly sievert the SI equivalent of the rem
proportional to risk from high doses single-photon-emission computed tomography
liquid drop model a model of nucleus (only to (SPECT) tomography performed with -emitting
understand some of its features) in which nucleons radiopharmaceuticals
in a nucleus act like atoms in a drop supercriticality an exponential increase in fissions
low dose a dose less than 100 mSv (10 rem) tagged process of attaching a radioactive substance
magnetic confinement a technique in which charged to a chemical compound
particles are trapped in a small region because of therapeutic ratio the ratio of abnormal cells killed to
difficulty in crossing magnetic field lines normal cells killed
Section Summary
32.1Diagnostics and Medical Imaging detectors, and an analysis computer.
• Tomography performed with -emitting
• Radiopharmaceuticals are compounds that are
radiopharmaceuticals is called SPECT and has the
used for medical imaging and therapeutics.
advantages of x-ray CT scans coupled with organ-
• The process of attaching a radioactive substance is
and function-specific drugs.
called tagging.
• PET is a similar technique that uses emitters
• Table 32.1lists certain diagnostic uses of
and detects the two annihilation rays, which aid
radiopharmaceuticals including the isotope and
to localize the source.
activity typically used in diagnostics.
• One common imaging device is the Anger camera,
which consists of a lead collimator, radiation
PAGE: 1476
1458 32 • Section Summary
32.2Biological Effects of Ionizing Radiation • Irradiating food can destroy insects and bacteria
by creating free radicals and radiolytic products
• The biological effects of ionizing radiation are due
that can break apart cell membranes.
to two effects it has on cells: interference with cell
• Food irradiation has produced no observable
reproduction, and destruction of cell function.
negative short-term effects for humans, but its
• A radiation dose unit called the rad is defined in
long-term effects are unknown.
terms of the ionizing energy deposited per
kilogram of tissue: 32.5Fusion
• Nuclear fusion is a reaction in which two nuclei are
• The SI unit for radiation dose is the gray(Gy),
combined to form a larger nucleus. It releases
which is defined to be
energy when light nuclei are fused to form
• To account for the effect of the type of particle
medium-mass nuclei.
creating the ionization, we use the relative
• Fusion is the source of energy in stars, with the
biological effectiveness (RBE) or quality factor
proton-proton cycle,
(QF) given inTable 32.2and define a unit called
the roentgen equivalent man (rem) as
• Particles that have short ranges or create large
being the principal sequence of energy-producing
ionization densities have RBEs greater than unity.
reactions in our Sun.
The SI equivalent of the rem is the sievert (Sv),
defined to be • The overall effect of the proton-proton cycle is
• Whole-body, single-exposure doses of 0.1 Sv or
where the 26.7 MeV includes the energy of the
less are low doses while those of 0.1 to 1 Sv are
positrons emitted and annihilated.
moderate, and those over 1 Sv are high doses.
• Attempts to utilize controlled fusion as an energy
Some immediate radiation effects are given in
source on Earth are related to deuterium and
Table 32.4. Effects due to low doses are not
tritium, and the reactions play important roles.
observed, but their risk is assumed to be directly
• Ignition is the condition under which controlled
proportional to those of high doses, an assumption
fusion is self-sustaining; it has not yet been
known as the linear hypothesis. Long-term effects
achieved. Break-even, in which the fusion energy
are cancer deaths at the rate of and
output is as great as the external energy input, has
genetic defects at roughly one-third this rate.
nearly been achieved.
Background radiation doses and sources are given
• Magnetic confinement and inertial confinement
inTable 32.5. World-wide average radiation
are the two methods being developed for heating
exposure from natural sources, including radon, is
fuel to sufficiently high temperatures, at sufficient
about 3 mSv, or 300 mrem. Radiation protection
density, and for sufficiently long times to achieve
utilizes shielding, distance, and time to limit
ignition. The first method uses magnetic fields and
exposure.
the second method uses the momentum of
32.3Therapeutic Uses of Ionizing Radiation
impinging laser beams for confinement.
• Radiotherapy is the use of ionizing radiation to 32.6Fission
treat ailments, now limited to cancer therapy.
• Nuclear fission is a reaction in which a nucleus is
• The sensitivity of cancer cells to radiation
split.
enhances the ratio of cancer cells killed to normal
• Fission releases energy when heavy nuclei are
cells killed, which is called the therapeutic ratio.
split into medium-mass nuclei.
• Doses for various organs are limited by the
• Self-sustained fission is possible, because
tolerance of normal tissue for radiation. Treatment
neutron-induced fission also produces neutrons
is localized in one region of the body and spread
that can induce other fissions,
out in time.
, where and
32.4Food Irradiation
are the two daughter nuclei, or fission fragments,
andxis the number of neutrons produced.
• Food irradiation is the treatment of food with
• A minimum mass, called the critical mass, should
ionizing radiation.
be present to achieve criticality.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1477
32 • Conceptual Questions 1459
• More than a critical mass can produce bombs use fission to ignite fusion.
supercriticality. • Both types of weapons produce huge numbers of
• The production of new or different isotopes nuclear reactions in a very short time.
(especially ) by nuclear transformation is • Energy yields are measured in kilotons or
called breeding, and reactors designed for this megatons of equivalent conventional explosives
purpose are called breeder reactors. and range from 0.1 kT to more than 20 MT.
• Nuclear bombs are characterized by far more
32.7Nuclear Weapons
thermal output and nuclear radiation output than
• There are two types of nuclear weapons—fission conventional explosives.
bombs use fission alone, whereas thermonuclear
Conceptual Questions
32.1Diagnostics and Medical Imaging 6. Which methods of radiation protection were used in
the device shown in the first photo inFigure 32.30?
1. In terms of radiation dose, what is the major
Which were used in the situation shown in the
difference between medical diagnostic uses of
second photo?
radiation and medical therapeutic uses?
2. One of the methods used to limit radiation dose to
the patient in medical imaging is to employ isotopes
with short half-lives. How would this limit the dose?
32.2Biological Effects of Ionizing Radiation
3. Isotopes that emit radiation are relatively safe
outside the body and exceptionally hazardous
inside. Yet those that emit radiation are hazardous
outside and inside. Explain why.
4. Why is radon more closely associated with inducing
lung cancer than other types of cancer?
5. The RBE for low-energy s is 1.7, whereas that for
higher-energy s is only 1. Explain why, considering
how the range of radiation depends on its energy.
FIGURE32.30(a) This x-ray fluorescence machine is one of
the thousands used in shoe stores to produce images of feet
as a check on the fit of shoes. They are unshielded and remain
on as long as the feet are in them, producing doses much
greater than medical images. Children were fascinated with
them. These machines were used in shoe stores until laws
preventing such unwarranted radiation exposure were
enacted in the 1950s. (credit: Andrew Kuchling ) (b) Now that
we know the effects of exposure to radioactive material,
safety is a priority. (credit: U.S. Navy)
7. What radioisotope could be a problem in homes
built of cinder blocks made from uranium mine
tailings? (This is true of homes and schools in
certain regions near uranium mines.)
8. Are some types of cancer more sensitive to
radiation than others? If so, what makes them more
sensitive?
PAGE: 1478
1460 32 • Conceptual Questions
9. Suppose a person swallows some radioactive 20. The ruins of the Chernobyl reactor are enclosed in
material by accident. What information is needed to a huge concrete structure built around it after the
be able to assess possible damage? accident. Some rain penetrates the building in
winter, and radioactivity from the building
32.3Therapeutic Uses of Ionizing Radiation increases. What does this imply is happening
inside?
10. Radiotherapy is more likely to be used to treat
21. Since the uranium or plutonium nucleus fissions
cancer in elderly patients than in young ones.
into several fission fragments whose mass
Explain why. Why is radiotherapy used to treat
distribution covers a wide range of pieces, would
young people at all?
you expect more residual radioactivity from fission
than fusion? Explain.
32.4Food Irradiation
22. The core of a nuclear reactor generates a large
11. Does food irradiation leave the food radioactive? amount of thermal energy from the decay of
To what extent is the food altered chemically for fission products, even when the power-producing
low and high doses in food irradiation? fission chain reaction is turned off. Would this
12. Compare a low dose of radiation to a human with a residual heat be greatest after the reactor has run
low dose of radiation used in food treatment. for a long time or short time? What if the reactor
13. Suppose one food irradiation plant uses a has been shut down for months?
source while another uses an equal activity of 23. How can a nuclear reactor contain many critical
. Assuming equal fractions of the rays from masses and not go supercritical? What methods
the sources are absorbed, why is more time are used to control the fission in the reactor?
24. Why can heavy nuclei with odd numbers of
needed to get the same dose using the
neutrons be induced to fission with thermal
source?
neutrons, whereas those with even numbers of
32.5Fusion neutrons require more energy input to induce
fission?
14. Why does the fusion of light nuclei into heavier 25. Why is a conventional fission nuclear reactor not
nuclei release energy? able to explode as a bomb?
15. Energy input is required to fuse medium-mass
nuclei, such as iron or cobalt, into more massive 32.7Nuclear Weapons
nuclei. Explain why.
26. What are some of the reasons that plutonium
16. In considering potential fusion reactions, what is
rather than uranium is used in all fission bombs
the advantage of the reaction
and as the trigger in all fusion bombs?
over the reaction
27. Use the laws of conservation of momentum and
energy to explain how a shape charge can direct
17. Give reasons justifying the contention made in the
most of the energy released in an explosion in a
text that energy from the fusion reaction
specific direction. (Note that this is similar to the
is relatively difficult to
situation in guns and cannons—most of the energy
capture and utilize.
goes into the bullet.)
28. How does the lithium deuteride in the
32.6Fission
thermonuclear bomb shown inFigure 32.28
18. Explain why the fission of heavy nuclei releases supply tritium as well as deuterium ?
energy. Similarly, why is it that energy input is 29. Fallout from nuclear weapons tests in the
required to fission light nuclei? atmosphere is mainly and , which have
19. Explain, in terms of conservation of momentum 28.6- and 32.2-y half-lives, respectively.
and energy, why collisions of neutrons with Atmospheric tests were terminated in most
protons will thermalize neutrons better than countries in 1963, although China only did so in
collisions with oxygen. 1980. It has been found that environmental
activities of these two isotopes are decreasing
faster than their half-lives. Why might this be?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1479
32 • Problems & Exercises 1461
Problems & Exercises
32.1Diagnostics and Medical Imaging 32.2Biological Effects of Ionizing Radiation
1. A neutron generator uses an source, such as 8. What is the dose in mSv for: (a) a 0.1 Gy x-ray? (b)
radium, to bombard beryllium, inducing the 2.5 mGy of neutron exposure to the eye? (c) 1.5
reaction . Such neutron mGy of exposure?
sources are called RaBe sources, or PuBe sources if 9. Find the radiation dose in Gy for: (a) A 10-mSv
they use plutonium to get the s. Calculate the fluoroscopic x-ray series. (b) 50 mSv of skin
energy output of the reaction in MeV. exposure by an emitter. (c) 160 mSv of and
2. Neutrons from a source (perhaps the one discussed rays from the in your body.
in the preceding problem) bombard natural 10. How many Gy of exposure is needed to give a
molybdenum, which is 24 percent . What is cancerous tumor a dose of 40 Sv if it is exposed to
the energy output of the reaction activity?
? The mass of is 11. What is the dose in Sv in a cancer treatment that
given inAppendix A: Atomic Masses, and that of exposes the patient to 200 Gy of rays?
is 98.907711 u. 12. One half the rays from are absorbed by a
3. The purpose of producing (usually by neutron 0.170-mm-thick lead shielding. Half of the rays
activation of natural molybdenum, as in the that pass through the first layer of lead are
preceding problem) is to produce Using the absorbed in a second layer of equal thickness.
rules, verify that the decay of produces What thickness of lead will absorb all but one in
. (Most nuclei produced in this decay 1000 of these rays?
are left in a metastable excited state denoted 13. A plumber at a nuclear power plant receives a
whole-body dose of 30 mSv in 15 minutes while
.)
repairing a crucial valve. Find the radiation-
4. (a) Two annihilation rays in a PET scan originate at
induced yearly risk of death from cancer and the
the same point and travel to detectors on either
chance of genetic defect from this maximum
side of the patient. If the point of origin is 9.00 cm
allowable exposure.
closer to one of the detectors, what is the
14. In the 1980s, the term picowave was used to
difference in arrival times of the photons? (This
describe food irradiation in order to overcome
could be used to give position information, but the
public resistance by playing on the well-known
time difference is small enough to make it difficult.)
safety of microwave radiation. Find the energy in
(b) How accurately would you need to be able to
MeV of a photon having a wavelength of a
measure arrival time differences to get a position
picometer.
resolution of 1.00 mm?
15. Find the mass of that has an activity of
5. Table 32.1indicates that 7.50 mCi of is used
.
in a brain scan. What is the mass of technetium?
6. The activities of and used in thyroid scans
32.3Therapeutic Uses of Ionizing Radiation
are given inTable 32.1to be 50 and ,
respectively. Find and compare the masses of
16. A beam of 168-MeV nitrogen nuclei is used for
and in such scans, given their respective half- cancer therapy. If this beam is directed onto a
lives are 8.04 d and 13.2 h. The masses are so 0.200-kg tumor and gives it a 2.00-Sv dose, how
small that the radioiodine is usually mixed with many nitrogen nuclei were stopped? (Use an RBE
stable iodine as a carrier to ensure normal of 20 for heavy ions.)
chemistry and distribution in the body. 17. (a) If the average molecular mass of compounds in
7. (a) Neutron activation of sodium, which is food is 50.0 g, how many molecules are there in
100% , produces , which is used in some 1.00 kg of food? (b) How many ion pairs are
heart scans, as seen inTable 32.1. The equation for created in 1.00 kg of food, if it is exposed to 1000
the reaction is . Find its Sv and it takes 32.0 eV to create an ion pair? (c)
energy output, given the mass of is Find the ratio of ion pairs to molecules. (d) If these
23.990962 u. ion pairs recombine into a distribution of 2000
(b) What mass of produces the needed new compounds, how many parts per billion is
5.0-mCi activity, given its half-life is 15.0 h? each?
PAGE: 1480
1462 32 • Problems & Exercises
18. Calculate the dose in Sv to the chest of a patient 25. If everyone in Australia received an extra 0.05
given an x-ray under the following conditions. The mSv per year of radiation, what would be the
x-ray beam intensity is , the area of the increase in the number of cancer deaths per year?
chest exposed is , 35.0% of the x-rays (Assume that time had elapsed for the effects to
are absorbed in 20.0 kg of tissue, and the become apparent.) Assume that there are
exposure time is 0.250 s. deaths per Sv of radiation per year.
19. (a) A cancer patient is exposed to rays from a What percent of the actual number of cancer
5000-Ci transillumination unit for 32.0 s. deaths recorded is this?
The rays are collimated in such a manner that
only 1.00% of them strike the patient. Of those, 32.5Fusion
20.0% are absorbed in a tumor having a mass of
26. Verify that the total number of nucleons, total
1.50 kg. What is the dose in rem to the tumor, if
charge, and electron family number are conserved
the average energy per decay is 1.25 MeV? None
for each of the fusion reactions in the proton-
of the s from the decay reach the patient. (b) Is
proton cycle in
the dose consistent with stated therapeutic
doses?
20. What is the mass of in a cancer therapy
and
transillumination unit containing 5.00 kCi of ?
21. Large amounts of are produced in copper
(List the value of each of the conserved quantities
exposed to accelerator beams. While machining
before and after each of the reactions.)
contaminated copper, a physicist ingests
27. Calculate the energy output in each of the fusion
of . Each decay emits an average -ray
reactions in the proton-proton cycle, and verify the
energy of 0.550 MeV, 40.0% of which is absorbed
values given in the above summary.
in the scientist’s 75.0-kg body. What dose in mSv
28. Show that the total energy released in the proton-
is caused by this in one day?
proton cycle is 26.7 MeV, considering the overall
22. Naturally occurring is listed as responsible for
effect in ,
16 mrem/y of background radiation. Calculate the
, and
mass of that must be inside the 55-kg body of
and being certain
a woman to produce this dose. Each decay
to include the annihilation energy.
emits a 1.32-MeV , and 50% of the energy is
29. Verify by listing the number of nucleons, total
absorbed inside the body.
charge, and electron family number before and
23. (a) Background radiation due to averages
after the cycle that these quantities are conserved
only 0.01 mSv/y, but it can range upward
in the overall proton-proton cycle in
depending on where a person lives. Find the mass
.
of in the 80.0-kg body of a man who
30. The energy produced by the fusion of a 1.00-kg
receives a dose of 2.50-mSv/y from it, noting that
mixture of deuterium and tritium was found in
each decay emits a 4.80-MeV particle.
ExampleCalculating Energy and Power from
You may neglect dose due to daughters and
Fusion. Approximately how many kilograms would
assume a constant amount, evenly distributed due
be required to supply the annual energy use in the
to balanced ingestion and bodily elimination. (b) Is
United States?
it surprising that such a small mass could cause a
31. Tritium is naturally rare, but can be produced by
measurable radiation dose? Explain.
the reaction . How much energy
24. The annual radiation dose from in our bodies
in MeV is released in this neutron capture?
is 0.01 mSv/y. Each decay emits a
32. Two fusion reactions mentioned in the text are
averaging 0.0750 MeV. Taking the fraction of
to be of normal , and assuming
and
the body is 13% carbon, estimate the fraction of
.
the decay energy absorbed. (The rest escapes,
Both reactions release energy, but the second also
exposing those close to you.)
creates more fuel. Confirm that the energies
produced in the reactions are 20.58 and 2.22 MeV,
respectively. Comment on which product nuclide
is most tightly bound, or .
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1481
32 • Problems & Exercises 1463
33. (a) Calculate the number of grams of deuterium in 39. Integrated Concepts
an 80,000-L swimming pool, given deuterium is The laser system tested for inertial confinement
0.0150% of natural hydrogen. can produce a 100-kJ pulse only 1.00 ns in
(b) Find the energy released in joules if this duration. (a) What is the power output of the laser
deuterium is fused via the reaction system during the brief pulse?
. (b) How many photons are in the pulse, given their
(c) Could the neutrons be used to create more wavelength is ?
energy? (c) What is the total momentum of all these
(d) Discuss the amount of this type of energy in a photons?
swimming pool as compared to that in, say, a (d) How does the total photon momentum
gallon of gasoline, also taking into consideration compare with that of a single 1.00 MeV deuterium
that water is far more abundant. nucleus?
34. How many kilograms of water are needed to 40. Integrated Concepts
obtain the 198.8 mol of deuterium, assuming that Find the amount of energy given to the
deuterium is 0.01500% (by number) of natural nucleus and to the ray in the reaction
hydrogen? , using the conservation of
35. The power output of the Sun is . momentum principle and taking the reactants to
(a) If 90% of this is supplied by the proton-proton be initially at rest. This should confirm the
cycle, how many protons are consumed per contention that most of the energy goes to the
second? ray.
(b) How many neutrinos per second should there 41. Integrated Concepts
be per square meter at the Earth from this (a) What temperature gas would have atoms
process? This huge number is indicative of how moving fast enough to bring two nuclei into
rarely a neutrino interacts, since large detectors contact? Note that, because both are moving, the
observe very few per day. average kinetic energy only needs to be half the
36. Another set of reactions that result in the fusing of electric potential energy of these doubly charged
hydrogen into helium in the Sun and especially in nuclei when just in contact with one another.
hotter stars is called the carbon cycle. It is (b) Does this high temperature imply practical
difficulties for doing this in controlled fusion?
42. Integrated Concepts
(a) Estimate the years that the deuterium fuel in
the oceans could supply the energy needs of the
world. Assume world energy consumption to be
ten times that of the United States which is
J/y and that the deuterium in the oceans
could be converted to energy with an efficiency of
Write down the overall effect of the carbon cycle
32%. You must estimate or look up the amount of
(as was done for the proton-proton cycle in
water in the oceans and take the deuterium
). Note the
content to be 0.015% of natural hydrogen to find
number of protons ( ) required and assume that
the mass of deuterium available. Note that
the positrons ( ) annihilate electrons to form
approximate energy yield of deuterium is
more rays.
J/kg.
37. (a) Find the total energy released in MeV in each
(b) Comment on how much time this is by any
carbon cycle (elaborated in the above problem)
human measure. (It is not an unreasonable result,
including the annihilation energy.
only an impressive one.)
(b) How does this compare with the proton-proton
cycle output?
38. Verify that the total number of nucleons, total
charge, and electron family number are conserved
for each of the fusion reactions in the carbon cycle
given in the above problem. (List the value of each
of the conserved quantities before and after each
of the reactions.)
PAGE: 1482
1464 32 • Problems & Exercises
32.6Fission 48. The naturally occurring radioactive isotope
does not make good fission fuel, because it has an
43. (a) Calculate the energy released in the neutron-
even number of neutrons; however, it can be bred
induced fission (similar to the spontaneous fission
into a suitable fuel (much as is bred into
inExample 32.3)
).
(a) What are and for ?
given and
(b) Write the reaction equation for neutron
. (b) This result is about 6
captured by and identify the nuclide
MeV greater than the result for spontaneous
produced in .
fission. Why? (c) Confirm that the total number of
(c) The product nucleus decays, as does its
nucleons and total charge are conserved in this
daughter. Write the decay equations for each, and
reaction.
identify the final nucleus.
44. (a) Calculate the energy released in the neutron-
(d) Confirm that the final nucleus has an odd
induced fission reaction
number of neutrons, making it a better fission fuel.
(e) Look up the half-life of the final nucleus to see
given and
if it lives long enough to be a useful fuel.
.
49. The electrical power output of a large nuclear
(b) Confirm that the total number of nucleons and
reactor facility is 900 MW. It has a 35.0%
total charge are conserved in this reaction.
efficiency in converting nuclear power to
45. (a) Calculate the energy released in the neutron-
electrical.
induced fission reaction
(a) What is the thermal nuclear power output in
megawatts?
given and
(b) How many nuclei fission each second,
.
assuming the average fission produces 200 MeV?
(b) Confirm that the total number of nucleons and
(c) What mass of is fissioned in one year of
total charge are conserved in this reaction.
full-power operation?
46. Confirm that each of the reactions listed for
50. A large power reactor that has been in operation
plutonium breeding just followingExample 32.4
for some months is turned off, but residual activity
conserves the total number of nucleons, the total
in the core still produces 150 MW of power. If the
charge, and electron family number.
average energy per decay of the fission products is
47. Breeding plutonium produces energy even before
1.00 MeV, what is the core activity in curies?
any plutonium is fissioned. (The primary purpose
of the four nuclear reactors at Chernobyl was
32.7Nuclear Weapons
breeding plutonium for weapons. Electrical power
was a by-product used by the civilian population.) 51. Find the mass converted into energy by a 12.0-kT
Calculate the energy produced in each of the bomb.
reactions listed for plutonium breeding just 52. What mass is converted into energy by a 1.00-MT
followingExample 32.4. The pertinent masses are bomb?
, 53. Fusion bombs use neutrons from their fission
, and trigger to create tritium fuel in the reaction
. . What is the energy
released by this reaction in MeV?
54. It is estimated that the total explosive yield of all
the nuclear bombs in existence currently is about
4,000 MT.
(a) Convert this amount of energy to kilowatt-
hours, noting that .
(b) What would the monetary value of this energy
be if it could be converted to electricity costing 10
cents per kW·h?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1483
32 • Problems & Exercises 1465
55. A radiation-enhanced nuclear weapon (or neutron 59. It is estimated that weapons tests in the
bomb) can have a smaller total yield and still atmosphere have deposited approximately 9 MCi
produce more prompt radiation than a of on the surface of the earth. Find the mass
conventional nuclear bomb. This allows the use of of this amount of .
neutron bombs to kill nearby advancing enemy 60. A 1.00-MT bomb exploded a few kilometers above
forces with radiation without blowing up your own the ground deposits 25.0% of its energy into
forces with the blast. For a 0.500-kT radiation- radiant heat.
enhanced weapon and a 1.00-kT conventional (a) Find the calories per at a distance of 10.0
nuclear bomb: (a) Compare the blast yields. (b) km by assuming a uniform distribution over a
Compare the prompt radiation yields. spherical surface of that radius.
56. (a) How many nuclei must fission to (b) If this heat falls on a person’s body, what
produce a 20.0-kT yield, assuming 200 MeV per temperature increase does it cause in the affected
fission? (b) What is the mass of this much ? tissue, assuming it is absorbed in a layer 1.00-cm
57. Assume one-fourth of the yield of a typical 320-kT deep?
strategic bomb comes from fission reactions 61. Integrated Concepts
averaging 200 MeV and the remainder from fusion One scheme to put nuclear weapons to
reactions averaging 20 MeV. nonmilitary use is to explode them underground in
(a) Calculate the number of fissions and the a geologically stable region and extract the
approximate mass of uranium and plutonium geothermal energy for electricity production.
fissioned, taking the average atomic mass to be There was a total yield of about 4,000 MT in the
238. combined arsenals in 2006. If 1.00 MT per day
(b) Find the number of fusions and calculate the could be converted to electricity with an efficiency
approximate mass of fusion fuel, assuming an of 10.0%:
average total atomic mass of the two nuclei in (a) What would the average electrical power
each reaction to be 5. output be?
(c) Considering the masses found, does it seem (b) How many years would the arsenal last at this
reasonable that some missiles could carry 10 rate?
warheads? Discuss, noting that the nuclear fuel is 62. Critical ThinkingA spherical target in a body is
only a part of the mass of a warhead. being targeted with radiation. The target is
58. This problem gives some idea of the magnitude of centered at on a grid that is in
the energy yield of a small tactical bomb. Assume centimeters. The target has a radius of 0.500
that half the energy of a 1.00-kT nuclear depth centimeters. (a) What two points on thex-axis are
charge set off under an aircraft carrier goes into at the extremes of where the positrons annihilate
lifting it out of the water—that is, into gravitational the electrons? (b) What two points on they-axis
potential energy. How high is the carrier lifted if its are at the extremes of where the positrons
mass is 90,000 tons? annihilate the electrons? (c) What can be said
about the directions of the pair of gamma rays that
result from the annihilations? (d) Can the use of
give information in three dimensions?
PAGE: 1484
1466 32 • Problems & Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1485
CHAPTER 33
Particle Physics
FIGURE33.1Part of the Large Hadron Collider at CERN, on the border of Switzerland and France. The LHC is a particle accelerator,
designed to study fundamental particles. (credit: Image Editor, Flickr)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
33.1The Yukawa Particle and the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle Revisited
33.2The Four Basic Forces
33.3Accelerators Create Matter from Energy
33.4Particles, Patterns, and Conservation Laws
33.5Quarks: Is That All There Is?
33.6GUTs: The Unification of Forces
INTRODUCTION TO PARTICLE PHYSICS Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
Following ideas remarkably similar to those of the ancient Greeks, we continue to look for smaller and smaller
structures in nature, hoping ultimately to find and understand the most fundamental building blocks that exist.
Atomic physics deals with the smallest units of elements and compounds. In its study, we have found a relatively
small number of atoms with systematic properties that explained a tremendous range of phenomena. Nuclear
physics is concerned with the nuclei of atoms and their substructures. Here, a smaller number of components—the
proton and neutron—make up all nuclei. Exploring the systematic behavior of their interactions has revealed even
more about matter, forces, and energy.Particle physicsdeals with the substructures of atoms and nuclei and is
particularly aimed at finding those truly fundamental particles that have no further substructure. Just as in atomic
and nuclear physics, we have found a complex array of particles and properties with systematic characteristics
analogous to the periodic table and the chart of nuclides. An underlying structure is apparent, and there is some
reason to think that wearefinding particles that have no substructure. Of course, we have been in similar situations
before. For example, atoms were once thought to be the ultimate substructure. Perhaps we will find deeper and
PAGE: 1486
1468 33 • Particle Physics
deeper structures and never come to an ultimate substructure. We may never really know, as indicated inFigure
33.2.
FIGURE33.2The properties of matter are based on substructures called molecules and atoms. Atoms have the substructure of a nucleus
with orbiting electrons, the interactions of which explain atomic properties. Protons and neutrons, the interactions of which explain the
stability and abundance of elements, form the substructure of nuclei. Protons and neutrons are not fundamental—they are composed of
quarks. Like electrons and a few other particles, quarks may be the fundamental building blocks of all there is, lacking any further
substructure. But the story is not complete, because quarks and electrons may have substructure smaller than details that are presently
observable.
This chapter covers the basics of particle physics as we know it today. An amazing convergence of topics is evolving
in particle physics. We find that some particles are intimately related to forces, and that nature on the smallest scale
may have its greatest influence on the large-scale character of the universe. It is an adventure exceeding the best
science fiction because it is not only fantastic, it is real.
33.1 The Yukawa Particle and the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle Revisited
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define Yukawa particle.
• State the Heisenberg uncertainty principle.
• Describe pion.
• Estimate the mass of a pion.
• Explain meson.
Particle physics as we know it today began with the ideas of Hideki Yukawa in 1935. Physicists had long been
concerned with how forces are transmitted, finding the concept of fields, such as electric and magnetic fields to be
very useful. A field surrounds an object and carries the force exerted by the object through space. Yukawa was
interested in the strong nuclear force in particular and found an ingenious way to explain its short range. His idea is a
blend of particles, forces, relativity, and quantum mechanics that is applicable to all forces. Yukawa proposed that
force is transmitted by the exchange of particles (called carrier particles). The field consists of these carrier
particles.
FIGURE33.3The strong nuclear force is transmitted between a proton and neutron by the creation and exchange of a pion. The pion is
created through a temporary violation of conservation of mass-energy and travels from the proton to the neutron and is recaptured. It is not
directly observable and is called a virtual particle. Note that the proton and neutron change identity in the process. The range of the force is
limited by the fact that the pion can only exist for the short time allowed by the Heisenberg uncertainty principle. Yukawa used the finite
range of the strong nuclear force to estimate the mass of the pion; the shorter the range, the larger the mass of the carrier particle.
Specifically for the strong nuclear force, Yukawa proposed that a previously unknown particle, now called apion, is
exchanged between nucleons, transmitting the force between them.Figure 33.3illustrates how a pion would carry a
force between a proton and a neutron. The pion has mass and can only be created by violating the conservation of
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1487
33.1 • The Yukawa Particle and the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle Revisited 1469
mass-energy. This is allowed by the Heisenberg uncertainty principle if it occurs for a sufficiently short period of
time. As discussed inProbability: The Heisenberg Uncertainty Principlethe Heisenberg uncertainty principle relates
the uncertainties in energy and in time by
33.1
where is Planck’s constant. Therefore, conservation of mass-energy can be violated by an amount for a time
in which time no process can detect the violation. This allows the temporary creation of a particle of
mass , where . The larger the mass and the greater the , the shorter is the time it can exist. This
means the range of the force is limited, because the particle can only travel a limited distance in a finite amount of
time. In fact, the maximum distance is , wherecis the speed of light. The pion must then be captured and,
thus, cannot be directly observed because that would amount to a permanent violation of mass-energy
conservation. Such particles (like the pion above) are calledvirtual particles, because they cannot be directly
observed but theireffectscan be directly observed. Realizing all this, Yukawa used the information on the range of
the strong nuclear force to estimate the mass of the pion, the particle that carries it. The steps of his reasoning are
approximately retraced in the following worked example:
EXAMPLE 33.1
Calculating the Mass of a Pion
Taking the range of the strong nuclear force to be about 1 fermi ( ), calculate the approximate mass of the
pion carrying the force, assuming it moves at nearly the speed of light.
Strategy
The calculation is approximate because of the assumptions made about the range of the force and the speed of the
pion, but also because a more accurate calculation would require the sophisticated mathematics of quantum
mechanics. Here, we use the Heisenberg uncertainty principle in the simple form stated above, as developed in
Probability: The Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle. First, we must calculate the time that the pion exists, given
that the distance it travels at nearly the speed of light is about 1 fermi. Then, the Heisenberg uncertainty principle
can be solved for the energy , and from that the mass of the pion can be determined. We will use the units of
for mass, which are convenient since we are often considering converting mass to energy and vice versa.
Solution
The distance the pion travels is , and so the time during which it exists is approximately
33.2
Now, solving the Heisenberg uncertainty principle for gives
33.3
Solving this and converting the energy to MeV gives
33.4
Mass is related to energy by , so that the mass of the pion is , or
33.5
Discussion
This is about 200 times the mass of an electron and about one-tenth the mass of a nucleon. No such particles were
PAGE: 1488
1470 33 • Particle Physics
known at the time Yukawa made his bold proposal.
Yukawa’s proposal of particle exchange as the method of force transfer is intriguing. But how can we verify his
proposal if we cannot observe the virtual pion directly? If sufficient energy is in a nucleus, it would be possible to
free the pion—that is, to create its mass from external energy input. This can be accomplished by collisions of
energetic particles with nuclei, but energies greater than 100 MeV are required to conserve both energy and
momentum. In 1947, pions were observed in cosmic-ray experiments, which were designed to supply a small flux
of high-energy protons that may collide with nuclei. Soon afterward, accelerators of sufficient energy were creating
pions in the laboratory under controlled conditions. Three pions were discovered, two with charge and one neutral,
and given the symbols , respectively. The masses of and are identical at ,
whereas has a mass of . These masses are close to the predicted value of and, since
they are intermediate between electron and nucleon masses, the particles are given the namemeson(now an
entire class of particles, as we shall see inParticles, Patterns, and Conservation Laws).
The pions, or -mesons as they are also called, have masses close to those predicted and feel the strong nuclear
force. Another previously unknown particle, now called the muon, was discovered during cosmic-ray experiments in
1936 (one of its discoverers, Seth Neddermeyer, also originated the idea of implosion for plutonium bombs). Since
the mass of a muon is around , at first it was thought to be the particle predicted by Yukawa. But it was
soon realized that muons do not feel the strong nuclear force and could not be Yukawa’s particle. Their role was
unknown, causing the respected physicist I. I. Rabi to comment, “Who ordered that?” This remains a valid question
today. We have discovered hundreds of subatomic particles; the roles of some are only partially understood. But
there are various patterns and relations to forces that have led to profound insights into nature’s secrets.
33.2 The Four Basic Forces
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• State the four basic forces.
• Explain the Feynman diagram for the exchange of a virtual photon between two positive charges.
• Define QED.
• Describe the Feynman diagram for the exchange of a between a proton and a neutron.
As first discussed inProblem-Solving Strategiesand mentioned at various points in the text since then, there are
only four distinct basic forces in all of nature. This is a remarkably small number considering the myriad phenomena
they explain. Particle physics is intimately tied to these four forces. Certain fundamental particles, called carrier
particles, carry these forces, and all particles can be classified according to which of the four forces they feel. The
table given below summarizes important characteristics of the four basic forces.
Force Approximate relative strength Range +/−1 Carrier particle
Gravity + only Graviton (conjectured)
Electromagnetic Photon (observed)
Weak force (observed 2 )
3
Strong force Gluons (conjectured )
TABLE33.1Properties of the Four Basic Forces
1 + attractive; ‑ repulsive; both.
2 Predicted by theory and first observed in 1983.
3 Eight proposed—indirect evidence of existence. Underlie meson exchange.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1489
33.2 • The Four Basic Forces 1471
FIGURE33.4The first image shows the exchange of a virtual photon transmitting the electromagnetic force between charges, just as virtual
pion exchange carries the strong nuclear force between nucleons. The second image shows that the photon cannot be directly observed in
its passage, because this would disrupt it and alter the force. In this case it does not get to the other charge.
FIGURE33.5The Feynman diagram for the exchange of a virtual photon between two positive charges illustrates how the electromagnetic
force is transmitted on a quantum mechanical scale. Time is graphed vertically while the distance is graphed horizontally. The two positive
charges are seen to be repelled by the photon exchange.
Although these four forces are distinct and differ greatly from one another under all but the most extreme
circumstances, we can see similarities among them. (InGUTs: the Unification of Forces, we will discuss how the four
forces may be different manifestations of a single unified force.) Perhaps the most important characteristic among
the forces is that they are all transmitted by the exchange of a carrier particle, exactly like what Yukawa had in mind
for the strong nuclear force. Each carrier particle is a virtual particle—it cannot be directly observed while
transmitting the force.Figure 33.4shows the exchange of a virtual photon between two positive charges. The
photon cannot be directly observed in its passage, because this would disrupt it and alter the force.
Figure 33.5shows a way of graphing the exchange of a virtual photon between two positive charges. This graph of
time versus position is called aFeynman diagram, after the brilliant American physicist Richard Feynman
(1918–1988) who developed it.
Figure 33.6is a Feynman diagram for the exchange of a virtual pion between a proton and a neutron representing
the same interaction as inFigure 33.3. Feynman diagrams are not only a useful tool for visualizing interactions at the
quantum mechanical level, they are also used to calculate details of interactions, such as their strengths and
probability of occurring. Feynman was one of the theorists who developed the field ofquantum electrodynamics
(QED), which is the quantum mechanics of electromagnetism. QED has been spectacularly successful in describing
electromagnetic interactions on the submicroscopic scale. Feynman was an inspiring teacher, had a colorful
personality, and made a profound impact on generations of physicists. He shared the 1965 Nobel Prize with Julian
Schwinger and S. I. Tomonaga for work in QED with its deep implications for particle physics.
Why is it that particles called gluons are listed as the carrier particles for the strong nuclear force when, inThe
Yukawa Particle and the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle Revisited, we saw that pions apparently carry that force?
The answer is that pions are exchanged but they have a substructure and, as we explore it, we find that the strong
PAGE: 1490
1472 33 • Particle Physics
force is actually related to the indirectly observed but more fundamentalgluons. In fact, all the carrier particles are
thought to be fundamental in the sense that they have no substructure. Another similarity among carrier particles is
that they are all bosons (first mentioned inPatterns in Spectra Reveal More Quantization), having integral intrinsic
spins.
FIGURE33.6The image shows a Feynman diagram for the exchange of a between a proton and a neutron, carrying the strong nuclear
force between them. This diagram represents the situation shown more pictorially inFigure 33.4.
There is a relationship between the mass of the carrier particle and the range of the force. The photon is massless
and has energy. So, the existence of (virtual) photons is possible only by virtue of the Heisenberg uncertainty
principle and can travel an unlimited distance. Thus, the range of the electromagnetic force is infinite. This is also
true for gravity. It is infinite in range because its carrier particle, the graviton, has zero rest mass. (Gravity is the most
difficult of the four forces to understand on a quantum scale because it affects the space and time in which the
others act. But gravity is so weak that its effects are extremely difficult to observe quantum mechanically. We shall
explore it further inGeneral Relativity and Quantum Gravity). The , and particles that carry the weak
nuclear force have mass, accounting for the very short range of this force. In fact, the , and are about
1000 times more massive than pions, consistent with the fact that the range of the weak nuclear force is about 1/
1000 that of the strong nuclear force. Gluons are actually massless, but since they act inside massive carrier
particles like pions, the strong nuclear force is also short ranged.
The relative strengths of the forces given in theTable 33.1are those for the most common situations. When
particles are brought very close together, the relative strengths change, and they may become identical at extremely
close range. As we shall see inGUTs: the Unification of Forces, carrier particles may be altered by the energy
required to bring particles very close together—in such a manner that they become identical.
33.3 Accelerators Create Matter from Energy
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• State the principle of a cyclotron.
• Explain the principle of a synchrotron.
• Describe the voltage needed by an accelerator between accelerating tubes.
• State Fermilab’s accelerator principle.
Before looking at all the particles we now know about, let us examine some of the machines that created them. The
fundamental process in creating previously unknown particles is to accelerate known particles, such as protons or
electrons, and direct a beam of them toward a target. Collisions with target nuclei provide a wealth of information,
such as information obtained by Rutherford using energetic helium nuclei from natural radiation. But if the energy
of the incoming particles is large enough, new matter is sometimes created in the collision. The more energy input
or , the more matter can be created, since . Limitations are placed on what can occur by known
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1491
33.3 • Accelerators Create Matter from Energy 1473
conservation laws, such as conservation of mass-energy, momentum, and charge. Even more interesting are the
unknown limitations provided by nature. Some expected reactions do occur, while others do not, and still other
unexpected reactions may appear. New laws are revealed, and the vast majority of what we know about particle
physics has come from accelerator laboratories. It is the particle physicist’s favorite indoor sport, which is partly
inspired by theory.
Early Accelerators
An early accelerator is a relatively simple, large-scale version of the electron gun. TheVan de Graaff(named after
the Dutch physicist), which you have likely seen in physics demonstrations, is a small version of the ones used for
nuclear research since their invention for that purpose in 1932. For more, seeFigure 33.7. These machines are
electrostatic, creating potentials as great as 50 MV, and are used to accelerate a variety of nuclei for a range of
experiments. Energies produced by Van de Graaffs are insufficient to produce new particles, but they have been
instrumental in exploring several aspects of the nucleus. Another, equally famous, early accelerator is thecyclotron,
invented in 1930 by the American physicist, E. O. Lawrence (1901–1958). For a visual representation with more
detail, seeFigure 33.8. Cyclotrons use fixed-frequency alternating electric fields to accelerate particles. The
particles spiral outward in a magnetic field, making increasingly larger radius orbits during acceleration. This clever
arrangement allows the successive addition of electric potential energy and so greater particle energies are possible
than in a Van de Graaff. Lawrence was involved in many early discoveries and in the promotion of physics programs
in American universities. He was awarded the 1939 Nobel Prize in Physics for the cyclotron and nuclear activations,
and he has an element and two major laboratories named for him.
Asynchrotronis a version of a cyclotron in which the frequency of the alternating voltage and the magnetic field
strength are increased as the beam particles are accelerated. Particles are made to travel the same distance in a
shorter time with each cycle in fixed-radius orbits. A ring of magnets and accelerating tubes, as shown inFigure
33.9, are the major components of synchrotrons. Accelerating voltages are synchronized (i.e., occur at the same
time) with the particles to accelerate them, hence the name. Magnetic field strength is increased to keep the orbital
radius constant as energy increases. High-energy particles require strong magnetic fields to steer them, so
superconducting magnets are commonly employed. Still limited by achievable magnetic field strengths,
synchrotrons need to be very large at very high energies, since the radius of a high-energy particle’s orbit is very
large. Radiation caused by a magnetic field accelerating a charged particle perpendicular to its velocity is called
synchrotron radiationin honor of its importance in these machines. Synchrotron radiation has a characteristic
spectrum and polarization, and can be recognized in cosmic rays, implying large-scale magnetic fields acting on
energetic and charged particles in deep space. Synchrotron radiation produced by accelerators is sometimes used
as a source of intense energetic electromagnetic radiation for research purposes.
FIGURE33.7An artist’s rendition of a Van de Graaff generator.
PAGE: 1492
1474 33 • Particle Physics
FIGURE33.8Cyclotrons use a magnetic field to cause particles to move in circular orbits. As the particles pass between the plates of the
Ds, the voltage across the gap is oscillated to accelerate them twice in each orbit.
Modern Behemoths and Colliding Beams
Physicists have built ever-larger machines, first to reduce the wavelength of the probe and obtain greater detail,
then to put greater energy into collisions to create new particles. Each major energy increase brought new
information, sometimes producing spectacular progress, motivating the next step. One major innovation was driven
by the desire to create more massive particles. Since momentum needs to be conserved in a collision, the particles
created by a beam hitting a stationary target should recoil. This means that part of the energy input goes into recoil
kinetic energy, significantly limiting the fraction of the beam energy that can be converted into new particles. One
solution to this problem is to have head-on collisions between particles moving in opposite directions.Colliding
beamsare made to meet head-on at points where massive detectors are located. Since the total incoming
momentum is zero, it is possible to create particles with momenta and kinetic energies near zero. Particles with
masses equivalent to twice the beam energy can thus be created. Another innovation is to create the antimatter
counterpart of the beam particle, which thus has the opposite charge and circulates in the opposite direction in the
same beam pipe. For a schematic representation, seeFigure 33.10.
FIGURE33.9(a) A synchrotron has a ring of magnets and accelerating tubes. The frequency of the accelerating voltages is increased to
cause the beam particles to travel the same distance in shorter time. The magnetic field should also be increased to keep each beam burst
traveling in a fixed-radius path. Limits on magnetic field strength require these machines to be very large in order to accelerate particles to
very high energies. (b) A positive particle is shown in the gap between accelerating tubes. (c) While the particle passes through the tube,
the potentials are reversed so that there is another acceleration at the next gap. The frequency of the reversals needs to be varied as the
particle is accelerated to achieve successive accelerations in each gap.
FIGURE33.10This schematic shows the two rings of Fermilab’s accelerator and the scheme for colliding protons and antiprotons (not to
scale).
Detectors capable of finding the new particles in the spray of material that emerges from colliding beams are as
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1493
33.3 • Accelerators Create Matter from Energy 1475
impressive as the accelerators. While the Fermilab Tevatron had proton and antiproton beam energies of about 1
TeV, so that it can create particles up to , the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at the European Center for
Nuclear Research (CERN) has achieved beam energies of 3.5 TeV, so that it has a 7-TeV collision energy; CERN
hopes to double the beam energy in 2014. The now-canceled Superconducting Super Collider was being
constructed in Texas with a design energy of 20 TeV to give a 40-TeV collision energy. It was to be an oval 30 km in
diameter. Its cost as well as the politics of international research funding led to its demise.
In addition to the large synchrotrons that produce colliding beams of protons and antiprotons, there are other large
electron-positron accelerators. The oldest of these was a straight-line orlinear accelerator, called the Stanford
Linear Accelerator (SLAC), which accelerated particles up to 50 GeV as seen inFigure 33.11. Positrons created by
the accelerator were brought to the same energy and collided with electrons in specially designed detectors. Linear
accelerators use accelerating tubes similar to those in synchrotrons, but aligned in a straight line. This helps
eliminate synchrotron radiation losses, which are particularly severe for electrons made to follow curved paths.
CERN had an electron-positron collider appropriately called the Large Electron-Positron Collider (LEP), which
accelerated particles to 100 GeV and created a collision energy of 200 GeV. It was 8.5 km in diameter, while the
SLAC machine was 3.2 km long.
FIGURE33.11The Stanford Linear Accelerator was 3.2 km long and had the capability of colliding electron and positron beams. SLAC was
also used to probe nucleons by scattering extremely short wavelength electrons from them. This produced the first convincing evidence of
a quark structure inside nucleons in an experiment analogous to those performed by Rutherford long ago.
EXAMPLE 33.2
Calculating the Voltage Needed by the Accelerator Between Accelerating Tubes
A linear accelerator designed to produce a beam of 800-MeV protons has 2000 accelerating tubes. What average
voltage must be applied between tubes (such as in the gaps inFigure 33.9) to achieve the desired energy?
Strategy
The energy given to the proton in each gap between tubes is where is the proton’s charge and is
the potential difference (voltage) across the gap. Since and ,
the proton gains 1 eV in energy for each volt across the gap that it passes through. The AC voltage applied to the
tubes is timed so that it adds to the energy in each gap. The effective voltage is the sum of the gap voltages and
equals 800 MV to give each proton an energy of 800 MeV.
Solution
There are 2000 gaps and the sum of the voltages across them is 800 MV; thus,
PAGE: 1494
1476 33 • Particle Physics
33.6
Discussion
A voltage of this magnitude is not difficult to achieve in a vacuum. Much larger gap voltages would be required for
higher energy, such as those at the 50-GeV SLAC facility. Synchrotrons are aided by the circular path of the
accelerated particles, which can orbit many times, effectively multiplying the number of accelerations by the
number of orbits. This makes it possible to reach energies greater than 1 TeV.
33.4 Particles, Patterns, and Conservation Laws
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define matter and antimatter.
• Outline the differences between hadrons and leptons.
• State the differences between mesons and baryons.
In the early 1930s only a small number of subatomic particles were known to exist—the proton, neutron, electron,
photon and, indirectly, the neutrino. Nature seemed relatively simple in some ways, but mysterious in others. Why,
for example, should the particle that carries positive charge be almost 2000 times as massive as the one carrying
negative charge? Why does a neutral particle like the neutron have a magnetic moment? Does this imply an internal
structure with a distribution of moving charges? Why is it that the electron seems to have no size other than its
wavelength, while the proton and neutron are about 1 fermi in size? So, while the number of known particles was
small and they explained a great deal of atomic and nuclear phenomena, there were many unexplained phenomena
and hints of further substructures.
Things soon became more complicated, both in theory and in the prediction and discovery of new particles. In 1928,
the British physicist P.A.M. Dirac (seeFigure 33.12) developed a highly successful relativistic quantum theory that
laid the foundations of quantum electrodynamics (QED). His theory, for example, explained electron spin and
magnetic moment in a natural way. But Dirac’s theory also predicted negative energy states for free electrons. By
1931, Dirac, along with Oppenheimer, realized this was a prediction of positively charged electrons (or positrons). In
1932, American physicist Carl Anderson discovered the positron in cosmic ray studies. The positron, or , is the
same particle as emitted in decay and was the first antimatter that was discovered. In 1935, Yukawa predicted
pions as the carriers of the strong nuclear force, and they were eventually discovered. Muons were discovered in
cosmic ray experiments in 1937, and they seemed to be heavy, unstable versions of electrons and positrons. After
World War II, accelerators energetic enough to create these particles were built. Not only were predicted and known
particles created, but many unexpected particles were observed. Initially called elementary particles, their numbers
proliferated to dozens and then hundreds, and the term “particle zoo” became the physicist’s lament at the lack of
simplicity. But patterns were observed in the particle zoo that led to simplifying ideas such as quarks, as we shall
soon see.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1495
33.4 • Particles, Patterns, and Conservation Laws 1477
FIGURE33.12P.A.M. Dirac’s theory of relativistic quantum mechanics not only explained a great deal of what was known, it also predicted
antimatter. (credit: Cambridge University, Cavendish Laboratory)
Matter and Antimatter
The positron was only the first example of antimatter. Every particle in nature has an antimatter counterpart,
although some particles, like the photon, are their own antiparticles. Antimatter has charge opposite to that of
matter (for example, the positron is positive while the electron is negative) but is nearly identical otherwise, having
the same mass, intrinsic spin, half-life, and so on. When a particle and its antimatter counterpart interact, they
annihilate one another, usually totally converting their masses to pure energy in the form of photons as seen in
Figure 33.13. Neutral particles, such as neutrons, have neutral antimatter counterparts, which also annihilate when
they interact. Certain neutral particles are their own antiparticle and live correspondingly short lives. For example,
the neutral pion is its own antiparticle and has a half-life about shorter than and , which are each
other’s antiparticles. Without exception, nature is symmetric—all particles have antimatter counterparts. For
example, antiprotons and antineutrons were first created in accelerator experiments in 1956 and the antiproton is
negative. Antihydrogen atoms, consisting of an antiproton and antielectron, were observed in 1995 at CERN, too. It
is possible to contain large-scale antimatter particles such as antiprotons by using electromagnetic traps that
confine the particles within a magnetic field so that they don't annihilate with other particles. However, particles of
the same charge repel each other, so the more particles that are contained in a trap, the more energy is needed to
power the magnetic field that contains them. It is not currently possible to store a significant quantity of antiprotons.
At any rate, we now see that negative charge is associated with both low-mass (electrons) and high-mass particles
(antiprotons) and the apparent asymmetry is not there. But this knowledge does raise another question—why is
there such a predominance of matter and so little antimatter? Possible explanations emerge later in this and the
next chapter.
Hadrons and Leptons
Particles can also be revealingly grouped according to what forces they feel between them. All particles (even those
that are massless) are affected by gravity, since gravity affects the space and time in which particles exist. All
charged particles are affected by the electromagnetic force, as are neutral particles that have an internal
distribution of charge (such as the neutron with its magnetic moment). Special names are given to particles that feel
the strong and weak nuclear forces.Hadronsare particles that feel the strong nuclear force, whereasleptonsare
particles that do not. The proton, neutron, and the pions are examples of hadrons. The electron, positron, muons,
and neutrinos are examples of leptons, the name meaning low mass. Leptons feel the weak nuclear force. In fact, all
particles feel the weak nuclear force. This means that hadrons are distinguished by being able to feel both the
strong and weak nuclear forces.
Table 33.2lists the characteristics of some of the most important subatomic particles, including the directly
observed carrier particles for the electromagnetic and weak nuclear forces, all leptons, and some hadrons. Several
hints related to an underlying substructure emerge from an examination of these particle characteristics. Note that
the carrier particles are calledgauge bosons. First mentioned inPatterns in Spectra Reveal More Quantization, a
PAGE: 1496
1478 33 • Particle Physics
bosonis a particle with zero or an integer value of intrinsic spin (such as ), whereas afermionis a
particle with a half-integer value of intrinsic spin ( ). Fermions obey the Pauli exclusion principle
whereas bosons do not. All the known and conjectured carrier particles are bosons.
FIGURE33.13When a particle encounters its antiparticle, they annihilate, often producing pure energy in the form of photons. In this case,
an electron and a positron convert all their mass into two identical energy rays, which move away in opposite directions to keep total
momentum zero as it was before. Similar annihilations occur for other combinations of a particle with its antiparticle, sometimes producing
more particles while obeying all conservation laws.
Particle Rest mass
Category Symbol Antiparticle Lifetime4 (s)
name
Gauge Photon Self 0 0 0 0 0 0 Stable
0 0 0 0 0
Bosons
Self 0 0 0 0 0
Electron 0.511 0 0 0 0 Stable
Neutrino
5
0 0 0 0 Stable
(e)
Muon 105.7 0 0 0 0
Leptons
Neutrino
0 0 0 0 Stable
Tau 1777 0 0 0 0
Neutrino
0 0 0 0 Stable
Hadrons (selected)
139.6 0 0 0 0 0 2.60 × 10−8
Mesons Pion
Self 135.0 0 0 0 0 0 8.4 × 10−17
4 Lifetimes are traditionally given as (which is , the inverse of the decay constant).
5 Neutrino masses may be zero. Experimental upper limits are given in parentheses.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1497
33.4 • Particles, Patterns, and Conservation Laws 1479
Particle Rest mass
Category Symbol Antiparticle Lifetime4 (s)
name
493.7 0 0 0 0 1.24 × 10−8
Kaon
497.6 0 0 0 0 0.90 × 10−10
Eta Self 547.9 0 0 0 0 0 2.53 × 10−19
(many other mesons known)
±
6
Proton 938.3 0 0 0 0 Stable
1
±
Neutron 939.6 0 0 0 0 882
1
±
Lambda 1115.7 0 0 0 2.63 × 10−10
1
±
1189.4 0 0 0 0.80 × 10−10
1
±
Baryons Sigma 1192.6 0 0 0 7.4 × 10−20
1
±
1197.4 0 0 0 1.48 × 10−10
1
±
1314.9 0 0 0 2.90 × 10−10
1
Xi
±
1321.7 0 0 0 1.64 × 10−10
1
±
Omega 1672.5 0 0 0 0.82 × 10−10
1
(many other baryons known)
TABLE33.2Selected Particle Characteristics 7
All known leptons are listed in the table given above. There are only six leptons (and their antiparticles), and they
seem to be fundamental in that they have no apparent underlying structure. Leptons have no discernible size other
than their wavelength, so that we know they are pointlike down to about . The leptons fall into three
families, implying three conservation laws for three quantum numbers. One of these was known from decay,
where the existence of the electron’s neutrino implied that a new quantum number, called theelectron family
number is conserved. Thus, in decay, an antielectron’s neutrino must be created with when an
electron with is created, so that the total remains 0 as it was before decay.
Once the muon was discovered in cosmic rays, its decay mode was found to be
6 Experimental lower limit is for proposed mode of decay.
PAGE: 1498
1480 33 • Particle Physics
33.7
which implied another “family” and associated conservation principle. The particle is a muon’s neutrino, and it is
created to conservemuon family number . So muons are leptons with a family of their own, andconservation of
total also seems to be obeyed in many experiments.
More recently, a third lepton family was discovered when particles were created and observed to decay in a
manner similar to muons. One principal decay mode is
33.8
Conservation of total seems to be another law obeyed in many experiments. In fact, particle experiments have
found that lepton family number is not universally conserved, due to neutrino “oscillations,” or transformations of
neutrinos from one family type to another.
Mesons and Baryons
Now, note that the hadrons in the table given above are divided into two subgroups, called mesons (originally for
medium mass) and baryons (the name originally meaning large mass). The division between mesons and baryons is
actually based on their observed decay modes and is not strictly associated with their masses.Mesonsare hadrons
that can decay to leptons and leave no hadrons, which implies that mesons are not conserved in number.Baryons
are hadrons that always decay to another baryon. A new physical quantity calledbaryon number seems to always
be conserved in nature and is listed for the various particles in the table given above. Mesons and leptons have
so that they can decay to other particles with . But baryons have if they are matter, and
if they are antimatter. Theconservation of total baryon numberis a more general rule than first noted in nuclear
physics, where it was observed that the total number of nucleons was always conserved in nuclear reactions and
decays. That rule in nuclear physics is just one consequence of the conservation of the total baryon number.
Forces, Reactions, and Reaction Rates
The forces that act between particles regulate how they interact with other particles. For example, pions feel the
strong force and do not penetrate as far in matter as do muons, which do not feel the strong force. (This was the way
those who discovered the muon knew it could not be the particle that carries the strong force—its penetration or
range was too great for it to be feeling the strong force.) Similarly, reactions that create other particles, like cosmic
rays interacting with nuclei in the atmosphere, have greater probability if they are caused by the strong force than if
they are caused by the weak force. Such knowledge has been useful to physicists while analyzing the particles
produced by various accelerators.
The forces experienced by particles also govern how particles interact with themselves if they are unstable and
decay. For example, the stronger the force, the faster they decay and the shorter is their lifetime. An example of a
nuclear decay via the strong force is with a lifetime of about . The neutron is a good example
of decay via the weak force. The process has a longer lifetime of 882 s. The weak force causes
this decay, as it does all decay. An important clue that the weak force is responsible for decay is the creation of
leptons, such as and . None would be created if the strong force was responsible, just as no leptons are
created in the decay of . The systematics of particle lifetimes is a little simpler than nuclear lifetimes when
hundreds of particles are examined (not just the ones in the table given above). Particles that decay via the weak
force have lifetimes mostly in the range of to s, whereas those that decay via the strong force have
lifetimes mostly in the range of to s. Turning this around, if we measure the lifetime of a particle, we
can tell if it decays via the weak or strong force.
Yet another quantum number emerges from decay lifetimes and patterns. Note that the particles , and
decay with lifetimes on the order of s (the exception is , whose short lifetime is explained by its particular
quark substructure.), implying that their decay is caused by the weak force alone, although they are hadrons and
feel the strong force. The decay modes of these particles also show patterns—in particular, certain decays that
should be possible within all the known conservation laws do not occur. Whenever something is possible in physics,
it will happen. If something does not happen, it is forbidden by a rule. All this seemed strange to those studying
these particles when they were first discovered, so they named a new quantum numberstrangeness, given the
symbol in the table given above. The values of strangeness assigned to various particles are based on the decay
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1499
33.4 • Particles, Patterns, and Conservation Laws 1481
systematics. It is found thatstrangeness is conserved by the strong force, which governs the production of most of
these particles in accelerator experiments. However,strangeness isnot conservedby the weak force. This
conclusion is reached from the fact that particles that have long lifetimes decay via the weak force and do not
conserve strangeness. All of this also has implications for the carrier particles, since they transmit forces and are
thus involved in these decays.
EXAMPLE 33.3
Calculating Quantum Numbers in Two Decays
(a) The most common decay mode of the particle is . Using the quantum numbers in the table
given above, show that strangeness changes by 1, baryon number and charge are conserved, and lepton family
numbers are unaffected.
(b) Is the decay allowed, given the quantum numbers in the table given above?
Strategy
In part (a), the conservation laws can be examined by adding the quantum numbers of the decay products and
comparing them with the parent particle. In part (b), the same procedure can reveal if a conservation law is broken
or not.
Solution for (a)
Before the decay, the has strangeness . After the decay, the total strangeness is –1 for the , plus 0 for
the . Thus, total strangeness has gone from –2 to –1 or a change of +1. Baryon number for the is
before the decay, and after the decay the has and the has so that the total baryon number
remains +1. Charge is –1 before the decay, and the total charge after is also . Lepton numbers for all the
particles are zero, and so lepton numbers are conserved.
Discussion for (a)
The decay is caused by the weak interaction, since strangeness changes, and it is consistent with the relatively
long lifetime of the .
Solution for (b)
The decay is allowed if charge, baryon number, mass-energy, and lepton numbers are conserved.
Strangeness can change due to the weak interaction. Charge is conserved as . Baryon number is conserved,
since all particles have .Mass-energy is conserved in the sense that the has a greater mass than the
products, so that the decay can be spontaneous. Lepton family numbers are conserved at 0 for the electron and tau
family for all particles. The muon family number is before and after. Strangeness changes
from +1 before to 0 + 0 after, for an allowed change of 1. The decay is allowed by all these measures.
Discussion for (b)
This decay is not only allowed by our reckoning, it is, in fact, the primary decay mode of the meson and is
caused by the weak force, consistent with the long lifetime.
There are hundreds of particles, all hadrons, not listed inTable 33.2, most of which have shorter lifetimes. The
systematics of those particle lifetimes, their production probabilities, and decay products are completely consistent
with the conservation laws noted for lepton families, baryon number, and strangeness, but they also imply other
quantum numbers and conservation laws. There are a finite, and in fact relatively small, number of these conserved
quantities, however, implying a finite set of substructures. Additionally, some of these short-lived particles resemble
the excited states of other particles, implying an internal structure. All of this jigsaw puzzle can be tied together and
explained relatively simply by the existence of fundamental substructures. Leptons seem to be fundamental
structures. Hadrons seem to have a substructure called quarks.Quarks: Is That All There Is?explores the basics of
the underlying quark building blocks.
PAGE: 1500
1482 33 • Particle Physics
FIGURE33.14Murray Gell-Mann (b. 1929) proposed quarks as a substructure of hadrons in 1963 and was already known for his work on
the concept of strangeness. Although quarks have never been directly observed, several predictions of the quark model were quickly
confirmed, and their properties explain all known hadron characteristics. Gell-Mann was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1969. (credit: Luboš
Motl)
33.5 Quarks: Is That All There Is?
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define fundamental particle.
• Describe quark and antiquark.
• List the flavors of quark.
• Outline the quark composition of hadrons.
• Determine quantum numbers from quark composition.
Quarks have been mentioned at various points in this text as fundamental building blocks and members of the
exclusive club of truly elementary particles. Note that an elementary orfundamental particlehas no substructure
(it is not made of other particles) and has no finite size other than its wavelength. This does not mean that
fundamental particles are stable—some decay, while others do not. Keep in mind thatallleptons seem to be
fundamental, whereasnohadrons are fundamental. There is strong evidence thatquarksare the fundamental
building blocks of hadrons as seen inFigure 33.15. Quarks are the second group of fundamental particles (leptons
are the first). The third and perhaps final group of fundamental particles is the carrier particles for the four basic
forces. Leptons, quarks, and carrier particles may be all there is. In this module we will discuss the quark
substructure of hadrons and its relationship to forces as well as indicate some remaining questions and problems.
FIGURE33.15All baryons, such as the proton and neutron shown here, are composed of three quarks. All mesons, such as the pions
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1501
33.5 • Quarks: Is That All There Is? 1483
shown here, are composed of a quark-antiquark pair. Arrows represent the spins of the quarks, which, as we shall see, are also colored. The
colors are such that they need to add to white for any possible combination of quarks.
Conception of Quarks
Quarks were first proposed independently by American physicists Murray Gell-Mann and George Zweig in 1963.
Their quaint name was taken by Gell-Mann from a James Joyce novel—Gell-Mann was also largely responsible for
the concept and name of strangeness. (Whimsical names are common in particle physics, reflecting the
personalities of modern physicists.) Originally, three quark types—orflavors—were proposed to account for the
then-known mesons and baryons. These quark flavors are namedup(u),down(d), andstrange(s). All quarks have
half-integral spin and are thus fermions. All mesons have integral spin while all baryons have half-integral spin.
Therefore, mesons should be made up of an even number of quarks while baryons need to be made up of an odd
number of quarks.Figure 33.15shows the quark substructure of the proton, neutron, and two pions. The most
radical proposal by Gell-Mann and Zweig is the fractional charges of quarks, which are and , whereas
all directly observed particles have charges that are integral multiples of . Note that the fractional value of the
quark does not violate the fact that theeis the smallest unit of charge that is observed, because a free quark cannot
exist.Table 33.3lists characteristics of the six quark flavors that are now thought to exist. Discoveries made since
1963 have required extra quark flavors, which are divided into three families quite analogous to leptons.
How Does it Work?
To understand how these quark substructures work, let us specifically examine the proton, neutron, and the two
pions pictured inFigure 33.15before moving on to more general considerations. First, the protonpis composed of
the three quarksuud, so that its total charge is , as expected. With the spins aligned
as in the figure, the proton’s intrinsic spin is , also as expected. Note that the spins of the up
quarks are aligned, so that they would be in the same state except that they have different colors (another quantum
number to be elaborated upon a little later). Quarks obey the Pauli exclusion principle. Similar comments apply to
the neutronn, which is composed of the three quarksudd. Note also that the neutron is made of charges that add to
zero but move internally, producing its well-known magnetic moment. When the neutron decays, it does so by
changing the flavor of one of its quarks. Writing neutron decay in terms of quarks,
33.9
We see that this is equivalent to a down quark changing flavor to become an up quark:
33.10
Name Symbol Antiparticle Spin Charge 8 Mass 9
Up 1/2 0 0 0 0 0.005
Down 1/2 0 0 0 0 0.008
Strange 1/2 0 0 0 0.50
Charmed 1/2 0 0 0 1.6
TABLE33.3Quarks and Antiquarks 10
8 is baryon number,Sis strangeness, is charm, is bottomness, is topness.
9 Values are approximate, are not directly observable, and vary with model.
10 The lower of the symbols are the values for antiquarks.
PAGE: 1502
1484 33 • Particle Physics
Name Symbol Antiparticle Spin Charge 8 Mass 9
Bottom 1/2 0 0 0 5
Top 1/2 0 0 0 173
TABLE33.3Quarks and Antiquarks 10
Particle Quark Composition
Mesons
11
, mixture
12
, mixture
1314
Baryons ,
11 These two mesons are different mixtures, but each is its own antiparticle, as indicated by its quark composition.
12 These two mesons are different mixtures, but each is its own antiparticle, as indicated by its quark composition.
13 Antibaryons have the antiquarks of their counterparts. The antiproton is , for example.
14 Baryons composed of the same quarks are different states of the same particle. For example, the is an excited state of the proton.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1503
33.5 • Quarks: Is That All There Is? 1485
Particle Quark Composition
TABLE33.4Quark Composition of
15
Selected Hadrons
This is an example of the general fact thatthe weak nuclear force can change the flavor of a quark. By general, we
mean that any quark can be converted to any other (change flavor) by the weak nuclear force. Not only can we get
, we can also get . Furthermore, the strange quark can be changed by the weak force, too, making
and possible. This explains the violation of the conservation of strangeness by the weak force noted in
the preceding section. Another general fact is thatthe strong nuclear force cannot change the flavor of a quark.
Again, fromFigure 33.15, we see that the meson (one of the three pions) is composed of an up quark plus an
antidown quark, or . Its total charge is thus , as expected. Its baryon number is 0, since it
has a quark and an antiquark with baryon numbers . The half-life is relatively long since,
although it is composed of matter and antimatter, the quarks are different flavors and the weak force should cause
the decay by changing the flavor of one into that of the other. The spins of the and quarks are antiparallel,
enabling the pion to have spin zero, as observed experimentally. Finally, the meson shown inFigure 33.15is the
antiparticle of the meson, and it is composed of the corresponding quark antiparticles. That is, the meson is
, while the meson is . These two pions annihilate each other quickly, because their constituent quarks are
each other’s antiparticles.
Two general rules for combining quarks to form hadrons are:
1. Baryons are composed of three quarks, and antibaryons are composed of three antiquarks.
2. Mesons are combinations of a quark and an antiquark.
One of the clever things about this scheme is that only integral charges result, even though the quarks have
fractional charge.
All Combinations are Possible
All quark combinations are possible.Table 33.4lists some of these combinations. When Gell-Mann and Zweig
proposed the original three quark flavors, particles corresponding to all combinations of those three had not been
observed. The pattern was there, but it was incomplete—much as had been the case in the periodic table of the
elements and the chart of nuclides. The particle, in particular, had not been discovered but was predicted by
quark theory. Its combination of three strange quarks, , gives it a strangeness of (seeTable 33.2) and other
predictable characteristics, such as spin, charge, approximate mass, and lifetime. If the quark picture is complete,
the should exist. It was first observed in 1964 at Brookhaven National Laboratory and had the predicted
characteristics as seen inFigure 33.16. The discovery of the was convincing indirect evidence for the existence
of the three original quark flavors and boosted theoretical and experimental efforts to further explore particle
physics in terms of quarks.
PAGE: 1504
1486 33 • Particle Physics
Patterns and Puzzles: Atoms, Nuclei, and Quarks
Patterns in the properties of atoms allowed the periodic table to be developed. From it, previously unknown
elements were predicted and observed. Similarly, patterns were observed in the properties of nuclei, leading to
the chart of nuclides and successful predictions of previously unknown nuclides. Now with particle physics,
patterns imply a quark substructure that, if taken literally, predicts previously unknown particles. These have
now been observed in another triumph of underlying unity.
FIGURE33.16The image relates to the discovery of the . It is a secondary reaction in which an accelerator-produced collides with
a proton via the strong force and conserves strangeness to produce the with characteristics predicted by the quark model. As with
other predictions of previously unobserved particles, this gave a tremendous boost to quark theory. (credit: Brookhaven National
Laboratory)
EXAMPLE 33.4
Quantum Numbers From Quark Composition
Verify the quantum numbers given for the particle inTable 33.2by adding the quantum numbers for its quark
composition as given inTable 33.4.
Strategy
The composition of the is given as inTable 33.4. The quantum numbers for the constituent quarks are given
inTable 33.3. We will not consider spin, because that is not given for the . But we can check on charge and the
other quantum numbers given for the quarks.
Solution
The total charge ofussis , which is correct for the . The baryon number is
, also correct since the is a matter baryon and has , as listed inTable 33.2. Its
strangeness is , also as expected fromTable 33.2. Its charm, bottomness, and topness are 0,
as are its lepton family numbers (it is not a lepton).
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1505
33.5 • Quarks: Is That All There Is? 1487
Discussion
This procedure is similar to what the inventors of the quark hypothesis did when checking to see if their solution to
the puzzle of particle patterns was correct. They also checked to see if all combinations were known, thereby
predicting the previously unobserved as the completion of a pattern.
Now, Let Us Talk About Direct Evidence
At first, physicists expected that, with sufficient energy, we should be able to free quarks and observe them directly.
This has not proved possible. There is still no direct observation of a fractional charge or any isolated quark. When
large energies are put into collisions, other particles are created—but no quarks emerge. There is nearly direct
evidence for quarks that is quite compelling. By 1967, experiments at SLAC scattering 20-GeV electrons from
protons had produced results like Rutherford had obtained for the nucleus nearly 60 years earlier. The SLAC
scattering experiments showed unambiguously that there were three pointlike (meaning they had sizes considerably
smaller than the probe’s wavelength) charges inside the proton as seen inFigure 33.17. This evidence made all but
the most skeptical admit that there was validity to the quark substructure of hadrons.
FIGURE33.17Scattering of high-energy electrons from protons at facilities like SLAC produces evidence of three point-like charges
consistent with proposed quark properties. This experiment is analogous to Rutherford’s discovery of the small size of the nucleus by
scattering α particles. High-energy electrons are used so that the probe wavelength is small enough to see details smaller than the proton.
More recent and higher-energy experiments have produced jets of particles in collisions, highly suggestive of three
quarks in a nucleon. Since the quarks are very tightly bound, energy put into separating them pulls them only so far
apart before it starts being converted into other particles. More energy produces more particles, not a separation of
quarks. Conservation of momentum requires that the particles come out in jets along the three paths in which the
quarks were being pulled. Note that there are only three jets, and that other characteristics of the particles are
consistent with the three-quark substructure.
FIGURE33.18Simulation of a proton-proton collision at 14-TeV center-of-mass energy in the ALICE detector at CERN LHC. The lines follow
PAGE: 1506
1488 33 • Particle Physics
particle trajectories and the cyan dots represent the energy depositions in the sensitive detector elements. (credit: Matevž Tadel)
Quarks Have Their Ups and Downs
The quark model actually lost some of its early popularity because the original model with three quarks had to be
modified. The up and down quarks seemed to compose normal matter as seen inTable 33.4, while the single
strange quark explained strangeness. Why didn’t it have a counterpart? A fourth quark flavor calledcharm(c) was
proposed as the counterpart of the strange quark to make things symmetric—there would be two normal quarks (u
andd) and two exotic quarks (sandc). Furthermore, at that time only four leptons were known, two normal and two
exotic. It was attractive that there would be four quarks and four leptons. The problem was that no known particles
contained a charmed quark. Suddenly, in November of 1974, two groups (one headed by C. C. Ting at Brookhaven
National Laboratory and the other by Burton Richter at SLAC) independently and nearly simultaneously discovered a
new meson with characteristics that made it clear that its substructure is . It was calledJby one group and psi
( ) by the other and now is known as the meson. Since then, numerous particles have been discovered
containing the charmed quark, consistent in every way with the quark model. The discovery of the meson had
such a rejuvenating effect on quark theory that it is now called the November Revolution. Ting and Richter shared
the 1976 Nobel Prize.
History quickly repeated itself. In 1975, the tau ( ) was discovered, and a third family of leptons emerged as seen in
Table 33.2).Theorists quickly proposed two more quark flavors calledtop(t) or truth andbottom(b) or beauty to
keep the number of quarks the same as the number of leptons. And in 1976, the upsilon ( ) meson was discovered
and shown to be composed of a bottom and an antibottom quark or , quite analogous to the being as seen
inTable 33.4. Being a single flavor, these mesons are sometimes called bare charm and bare bottom and reveal the
characteristics of their quarks most clearly. Other mesons containing bottom quarks have since been observed. In
1995, two groups at Fermilab confirmed the top quark’s existence, completing the picture of six quarks listed in
Table 33.3. Each successive quark discovery—first , then , and finally —has required higher energy because each
has higher mass. Quark masses inTable 33.3are only approximately known, because they are not directly observed.
They must be inferred from the masses of the particles they combine to form.
What’s Color got to do with it?—A Whiter Shade of Pale
As mentioned and shown inFigure 33.15, quarks carry another quantum number, which we callcolor. Of course, it
is not the color we sense with visible light, but its properties are analogous to those of three primary and three
secondary colors. Specifically, a quark can have one of three color values we callred( ),green( ), andblue( ) in
analogy to those primary visible colors. Antiquarks have three values we callantired or cyan ,antigreen or
magenta , andantiblue or yellow in analogy to those secondary visible colors. The reason for these names
is that when certain visual colors are combined, the eye sees white. The analogy of the colors combining to white is
used to explain why baryons are made of three quarks, why mesons are a quark and an antiquark, and why we
cannot isolate a single quark. The force between the quarks is such that their combined colors produce white. This
is illustrated inFigure 33.19. A baryon must have one of each primary color or RGB, which produces white. A meson
must have a primary color and its anticolor, also producing white.
FIGURE33.19The three quarks composing a baryon must be RGB, which add to white. The quark and antiquark composing a meson must
be a color and anticolor, here also adding to white. The force between systems that have color is so great that they can neither be
separated nor exist as colored.
Why must hadrons be white? The color scheme is intentionally devised to explain why baryons have three quarks
and mesons have a quark and an antiquark. Quark color is thought to be similar to charge, but with more values. An
ion, by analogy, exerts much stronger forces than a neutral molecule. When the color of a combination of quarks is
white, it is like a neutral atom. The forces a white particle exerts are like the polarization forces in molecules, but in
hadrons these leftovers are the strong nuclear force. When a combination of quarks has color other than white, it
exertsextremelylarge forces—even larger than the strong force—and perhaps cannot be stable or permanently
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1507
33.6 • GUTs: The Unification of Forces 1489
separated. This is part of thetheory of quark confinement, which explains how quarks can exist and yet never be
isolated or directly observed. Finally, an extra quantum number with three values (like those we assign to color) is
necessary for quarks to obey the Pauli exclusion principle. Particles such as the , which is composed of three
strange quarks, , and the , which is three up quarks,uuu, can exist because the quarks have different colors
and do not have the same quantum numbers. Color is consistent with all observations and is now widely accepted.
Quark theory including color is calledquantum chromodynamics(QCD), also named by Gell-Mann.
The Three Families
Fundamental particles are thought to be one of three types—leptons, quarks, or carrier particles. Each of those three
types is further divided into three analogous families as illustrated inFigure 33.20. We have examined leptons and
quarks in some detail. Each has six members (and their six antiparticles) divided into three analogous families. The
first family is normal matter, of which most things are composed. The second is exotic, and the third more exotic and
more massive than the second. The only stable particles are in the first family, which also has unstable members.
Always searching for symmetry and similarity, physicists have also divided the carrier particles into three families,
omitting the graviton. Gravity is special among the four forces in that it affects the space and time in which the other
forces exist and is proving most difficult to include in a Theory of Everything or TOE (to stub the pretension of such a
theory). Gravity is thus often set apart. It is not certain that there is meaning in the groupings shown inFigure 33.20,
but the analogies are tempting. In the past, we have been able to make significant advances by looking for analogies
and patterns, and this is an example of one under current scrutiny. There are connections between the families of
leptons, in that the decays into the and the into thee. Similarly for quarks, the higher families eventually decay
into the lowest, leaving onlyuanddquarks. We have long sought connections between the forces in nature. Since
these are carried by particles, we will explore connections between gluons, and , and photons as part of the
search for unification of forces discussed inGUTs: The Unification of Forces..
FIGURE33.20The three types of particles are leptons, quarks, and carrier particles. Each of those types is divided into three analogous
families, with the graviton left out.
33.6 GUTs: The Unification of Forces
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• State the grand unified theory.
• Explain the electroweak theory.
• Define gluons.
• Describe the principle of quantum chromodynamics.
• Define the standard model.
Present quests to show that the four basic forces are different manifestations of a single unified force follow a long
tradition. In the 19th century, the distinct electric and magnetic forces were shown to be intimately connected and
are now collectively called the electromagnetic force. More recently, the weak nuclear force has been shown to be
connected to the electromagnetic force in a manner suggesting that a theory may be constructed in which all four
forces are unified. Certainly, there are similarities in how forces are transmitted by the exchange of carrier particles,
and the carrier particles themselves (the gauge bosons inTable 33.2) are also similar in important ways. The
PAGE: 1508
1490 33 • Particle Physics
analogy to the unification of electric and magnetic forces is quite good—the four forces are distinct under normal
circumstances, but there are hints of connections even on the atomic scale, and there may be conditions under
which the forces are intimately related and even indistinguishable. The search for a correct theory linking the forces,
called theGrand Unified Theory (GUT), is explored in this section in the realm of particle physics.Frontiers of
Physicsexpands the story in making a connection with cosmology, on the opposite end of the distance scale.
Figure 33.21is a Feynman diagram showing how the weak nuclear force is transmitted by the carrier particle ,
similar to the diagrams inFigure 33.5andFigure 33.6for the electromagnetic and strong nuclear forces. In the
1960s, a gauge theory, calledelectroweak theory, was developed by Steven Weinberg, Sheldon Glashow, and
Abdus Salam and proposed that the electromagnetic and weak forces are identical at sufficiently high energies. One
of its predictions, in addition to describing both electromagnetic and weak force phenomena, was the existence of
the , and carrier particles. Not only were three particles having spin 1 predicted, the mass of the
and was predicted to be , and that of the was predicted to be . (Their masses had to
be about 1000 times that of the pion, or about , since the range of the weak force is about 1000 times
less than the strong force carried by virtual pions.) In 1983, these carrier particles were observed at CERN with the
predicted characteristics, including masses having the predicted values as seen inTable 33.2. This was another
triumph of particle theory and experimental effort, resulting in the 1984 Nobel Prize to the experiment’s group
leaders Carlo Rubbia and Simon van der Meer. Theorists Weinberg, Glashow, and Salam had already been honored
with the 1979 Nobel Prize for other aspects of electroweak theory.
FIGURE33.21The exchange of a virtual carries the weak nuclear force between an electron and a neutrino in this Feynman diagram.
The is one of the carrier particles for the weak nuclear force that has now been created in the laboratory with characteristics predicted
by electroweak theory.
Although the weak nuclear force is very short ranged ( , as indicated inTable 33.1), its effects on atomic
levels can be measured given the extreme precision of modern techniques. Since electrons spend some time in the
nucleus, their energies are affected, and spectra can even indicate new aspects of the weak force, such as the
possibility of other carrier particles. So systems many orders of magnitude larger than the range of the weak force
supply evidence of electroweak unification in addition to evidence found at the particle scale.
Gluons( ) are the proposed carrier particles for the strong nuclear force, although they are not directly observed.
Like quarks, gluons may be confined to systems having a total color of white. Less is known about gluons than the
fact that they are the carriers of the weak and certainly of the electromagnetic force. QCD theory calls for eight
gluons, all massless and all spin 1. Six of the gluons carry a color and an anticolor, while two do not carry color, as
illustrated inFigure 33.22(a). There is indirect evidence of the existence of gluons in nucleons. When high-energy
electrons are scattered from nucleons and evidence of quarks is seen, the momenta of the quarks are smaller than
they would be if there were no gluons. That means that the gluons carrying force between quarks also carry some
momentum, inferred by the already indirect quark momentum measurements. At any rate, the gluons carry color
charge and can change the colors of quarks when exchanged, as seen inFigure 33.22(b). In the figure, a red down
quark interacts with a green strange quark by sending it a gluon. That gluon carries red away from the down quark
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1509
33.6 • GUTs: The Unification of Forces 1491
and leaves it green, because it is an (red-antigreen) gluon. (Taking antigreen away leaves you green.) Its
antigreenness kills the green in the strange quark, and its redness turns the quark red.
FIGURE33.22In figure (a), the eight types of gluons that carry the strong nuclear force are divided into a group of six that carry color and a
group of two that do not. Figure (b) shows that the exchange of gluons between quarks carries the strong force and may change the color of
a quark.
The strong force is complicated, since observable particles that feel the strong force (hadrons) contain multiple
quarks.Figure 33.23shows the quark and gluon details of pion exchange between a proton and a neutron as
illustrated earlier inFigure 33.3andFigure 33.6. The quarks within the proton and neutron move along together
exchanging gluons, until the proton and neutron get close together. As the quark leaves the proton, a gluon creates
a pair of virtual particles, a quark and a antiquark. The quark stays behind and the proton turns into a neutron,
while the and move together as a (Table 33.4confirms the composition for the .) The annihilates a
quark in the neutron, the joins the neutron, and the neutron becomes a proton. A pion is exchanged and a force
is transmitted.
FIGURE33.23This Feynman diagram is the same interaction as shown inFigure 33.6, but it shows the quark and gluon details of the
strong force interaction.
It is beyond the scope of this text to go into more detail on the types of quark and gluon interactions that underlie
the observable particles, but the theory (quantum chromodynamicsor QCD) is very self-consistent. So successful
have QCD and the electroweak theory been that, taken together, they are called theStandard Model. Advances in
knowledge are expected to modify, but not overthrow, the Standard Model of particle physics and forces.
Making Connections: Unification of Forces
Grand Unified Theory (GUT) is successful in describing the four forces as distinct under normal circumstances,
but connected in fundamental ways. Experiments have verified that the weak and electromagnetic force become
identical at very small distances and provide the GUT description of the carrier particles for the forces. GUT
PAGE: 1510
1492 33 • Particle Physics
predicts that the other forces become identical under conditions so extreme that they cannot be tested in the
laboratory, although there may be lingering evidence of them in the evolution of the universe. GUT is also
successful in describing a system of carrier particles for all four forces, but there is much to be done, particularly
in the realm of gravity.
How can forces be unified? They are definitely distinct under most circumstances, for example, being carried by
different particles and having greatly different strengths. But experiments show that at extremely small distances,
the strengths of the forces begin to become more similar. In fact, electroweak theory’s prediction of the , ,
and carrier particles was based on the strengths of the two forces being identical at extremely small distances
as seen inFigure 33.24. As discussed in case of the creation of virtual particles for extremely short times, the small
distances or short ranges correspond to the large masses of the carrier particles and the correspondingly large
energies needed to create them. Thus, the energy scale on the horizontal axis ofFigure 33.24corresponds to
smaller and smaller distances, with 100 GeV corresponding to approximately, for example. At that distance,
the strengths of the EM and weak forces are the same. To test physics at that distance, energies of about 100 GeV
must be put into the system, and that is sufficient to create and release the , , and carrier particles. At
those and higher energies, the masses of the carrier particles becomes less and less relevant, and the in
particular resembles the massless, chargeless, spin 1 photon. In fact, there is enough energy when things are
pushed to even smaller distances to transform the, and into massless carrier particles more similar to photons
and gluons. These have not been observed experimentally, but there is a prediction of an associated particle called
theHiggs boson. The mass of this particle is not predicted with nearly the certainty with which the mass of the
and particles were predicted, but it was hoped that the Higgs boson could be observed at the now-
canceled Superconducting Super Collider (SSC). Ongoing experiments at the Large Hadron Collider at CERN have
presented some evidence for a Higgs boson with a mass of 125 GeV, and there is a possibility of a direct discovery
during 2012. The existence of this more massive particle would give validity to the theory that the carrier particles
are identical under certain circumstances.
FIGURE33.24The relative strengths of the four basic forces vary with distance and, hence, energy is needed to probe small distances. At
ordinary energies (a few eV or less), the forces differ greatly as indicated inTable 33.1. However, at energies available at accelerators, the
weak and EM forces become identical, or unified. Unfortunately, the energies at which the strong and electroweak forces become the same
are unreachable even in principle at any conceivable accelerator. The universe may provide a laboratory, and nature may show effects at
ordinary energies that give us clues about the validity of this graph.
The small distances and high energies at which the electroweak force becomes identical with the strong nuclear
force are not reachable with any conceivable human-built accelerator. At energies of about (16,000 J per
particle), distances of about can be probed. Such energies are needed to test theory directly, but these are
about higher than the proposed giant SSC would have had, and the distances are about smaller than any
structure we have direct knowledge of. This would be the realm of various GUTs, of which there are many since there
is no constraining evidence at these energies and distances. Past experience has shown that any time you probe so
many orders of magnitude further (here, about ), you find the unexpected. Even more extreme are the energies
and distances at which gravity is thought to unify with the other forces in a TOE. Most speculative and least
constrained by experiment are TOEs, one of which is calledSuperstring theory. Superstrings are entities that are
in scale and act like one-dimensional oscillating strings and are also proposed to underlie all particles,
forces, and space itself.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1511
33.6 • GUTs: The Unification of Forces 1493
At the energy of GUTs, the carrier particles of the weak force would become massless and identical to gluons. If that
happens, then both lepton and baryon conservation would be violated. We do not see such violations, because we
do not encounter such energies. However, there is a tiny probability that, at ordinary energies, the virtual particles
that violate the conservation of baryon number may exist for extremely small amounts of time (corresponding to
very small ranges). All GUTs thus predict that the proton should be unstable, but would decay with an extremely
long lifetime of about . The predicted decay mode is
33.11
which violates both conservation of baryon number and electron family number. Although is an extremely
long time (about times the age of the universe), there are a lot of protons, and detectors have been
constructed to look for the proposed decay mode as seen inFigure 33.25. It is somewhat comforting that proton
decay has not been detected, and its experimental lifetime is now greater than . This does not prove
GUTs wrong, but it does place greater constraints on the theories, benefiting theorists in many ways.
From looking increasingly inward at smaller details for direct evidence of electroweak theory and GUTs, we turn
around and look to the universe for evidence of the unification of forces. In the 1920s, the expansion of the universe
was discovered. Thinking backward in time, the universe must once have been very small, dense, and extremely hot.
At a tiny fraction of a second after the fabled Big Bang, forces would have been unified and may have left their
fingerprint on the existing universe. This, one of the most exciting forefronts of physics, is the subject ofFrontiers of
Physics.
FIGURE33.25In the Tevatron accelerator at Fermilab, protons and antiprotons collide at high energies, and some of those collisions could
result in the production of a Higgs boson in association with aWboson. When theWboson decays to a high-energy lepton and a neutrino,
the detector triggers on the lepton, whether it is an electron or a muon. (credit: D. J. Miller)
PAGE: 1512
1494 33 • Glossary
Glossary
baryon number a conserved physical quantity that is would give validity to the theory that carrier
zero for mesons and leptons and for baryons and particles are identical under certain circumstances
antibaryons, respectively leptons particles that do not feel the strong nuclear
baryons hadrons that always decay to another force
baryon linear accelerator accelerator that accelerates
boson particle with zero or an integer value of particles in a straight line
intrinsic spin meson hadrons that can decay to leptons and leave
bottom a quark flavor no hadrons
charm a quark flavor, which is the counterpart of the meson particle whose mass is intermediate between
strange quark the electron and nucleon masses
colliding beams head-on collisions between particles muon family number the number that is assigned
moving in opposite directions to all members of the muon family, or the number 0
color a quark flavor that is assigned to all particles not in the muon
conservation of total baryon number a general rule family
based on the observation that the total number of particle physics the study of and the quest for those
nucleons was always conserved in nuclear reactions truly fundamental particles having no substructure
and decays pion particle exchanged between nucleons,
conservation of total electron family number a transmitting the force between them
general rule stating that the total electron family quantum chromodynamics quark theory including
number stays the same through an interaction color
conservation of total muon family number a general quantum chromodynamics the governing theory of
rule stating that the total muon family number stays connecting quantum number color to gluons
the same through an interaction quantum electrodynamics the theory of
cyclotron accelerator that uses fixed-frequency electromagnetism on the particle scale
alternating electric fields and fixed magnets to quark an elementary particle and a fundamental
accelerate particles in a circular spiral path constituent of matter
down the second-lightest of all quarks standard model combination of quantum
electron family number the number that is chromodynamics and electroweak theory
assigned to all members of the electron family, or strange the third lightest of all quarks
the number 0 that is assigned to all particles not in strangeness a physical quantity assigned to various
the electron family particles based on decay systematics
electroweak theory theory showing connections superstring theory a theory of everything based on
between EM and weak forces vibrating strings some in length
fermion particle with a half-integer value of intrinsic synchrotron a version of a cyclotron in which the
spin frequency of the alternating voltage and the
Feynman diagram a graph of time versus position magnetic field strength are increased as the beam
that describes the exchange of virtual particles particles are accelerated
between subatomic particles synchrotron radiation radiation caused by a
flavors quark type magnetic field accelerating a charged particle
fundamental particle particle with no substructure perpendicular to its velocity
gauge boson particle that carries one of the four tau family number the number that is assigned to
forces all members of the tau family, or the number 0 that
gluons eight proposed particles which carry the is assigned to all particles not in the tau family
strong force theory of quark confinement explains how quarks
gluons exchange particles, analogous to the can exist and yet never be isolated or directly
exchange of photons that gives rise to the observed
electromagnetic force between two charged top a quark flavor
particles up the lightest of all quarks
grand unified theory theory that shows unification of Van de Graaff early accelerator: simple, large-scale
the strong and electroweak forces version of the electron gun
hadrons particles that feel the strong nuclear force virtual particles particles which cannot be directly
Higgs boson a massive particle that, if observed, observed but their effects can be directly observed
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1513
33 • Section Summary 1495
Section Summary
33.1The Yukawa Particle and the • Hadrons are particles that feel the strong nuclear
Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle Revisited force and are divided into baryons, with the baryon
family number being conserved, and mesons.
• Yukawa’s idea of virtual particle exchange as the
carrier of forces is crucial, with virtual particles 33.5Quarks: Is That All There Is?
being formed in temporary violation of the
• Hadrons are thought to be composed of quarks,
conservation of mass-energy as allowed by the
with baryons having three quarks and mesons
Heisenberg uncertainty principle.
having a quark and an antiquark.
33.2The Four Basic Forces • The characteristics of the six quarks and their
antiquark counterparts are given inTable 33.3,
• The four basic forces and their carrier particles are
and the quark compositions of certain hadrons are
summarized in theTable 33.1.
given inTable 33.4.
• Feynman diagrams are graphs of time versus
• Indirect evidence for quarks is very strong,
position and are highly useful pictorial
explaining all known hadrons and their quantum
representations of particle processes.
numbers, such as strangeness, charm, topness,
• The theory of electromagnetism on the particle
and bottomness.
scale is called quantum electrodynamics (QED).
• Quarks come in six flavors and three colors and
33.3Accelerators Create Matter from occur only in combinations that produce white.
Energy • Fundamental particles have no further
substructure, not even a size beyond their de
• A variety of particle accelerators have been used Broglie wavelength.
to explore the nature of subatomic particles and to • There are three types of fundamental
test predictions of particle theories. particles—leptons, quarks, and carrier particles.
• Modern accelerators used in particle physics are Each type is divided into three analogous families
either large synchrotrons or linear accelerators. as indicated inFigure 33.20.
• The use of colliding beams makes much greater
33.6GUTs: The Unification of Forces
energy available for the creation of particles, and
collisions between matter and antimatter allow a
• Attempts to show unification of the four forces are
greater range of final products.
called Grand Unified Theories (GUTs) and have
33.4Particles, Patterns, and Conservation been partially successful, with connections proven
between EM and weak forces in electroweak
Laws
theory.
• All particles of matter have an antimatter • The strong force is carried by eight proposed
counterpart that has the opposite charge and particles called gluons, which are intimately
certain other quantum numbers as seen inTable connected to a quantum number called
33.2. These matter-antimatter pairs are otherwise color—their governing theory is thus called
very similar but will annihilate when brought quantum chromodynamics (QCD). Taken together,
together. Known particles can be divided into three QCD and the electroweak theory are widely
major groups—leptons, hadrons, and carrier accepted as the Standard Model of particle
particles (gauge bosons). physics.
• Leptons do not feel the strong nuclear force and • Unification of the strong force is expected at such
are further divided into three groups—electron high energies that it cannot be directly tested, but
family designated by electron family number ; it may have observable consequences in the as-
muon family designated by muon family number yet unobserved decay of the proton and topics to
; and tau family designated by tau family be discussed in the next chapter. Although
number . The family numbers are not unification of forces is generally anticipated, much
universally conserved due to neutrino oscillations. remains to be done to prove its validity.
PAGE: 1514
1496 33 • Conceptual Questions
Conceptual Questions
33.3Accelerators Create Matter from 11. Why does the meson have such a short lifetime
Energy compared to most other mesons?
12. (a) Is a hadron always a baryon?
1. The total energy in the beam of an accelerator is far
(b) Is a baryon always a hadron?
greater than the energy of the individual beam
(c) Can an unstable baryon decay into a meson,
particles. Why isn’t this total energy available to
leaving no other baryon?
create a single extremely massive particle?
13. Explain how conservation of baryon number is
2. Synchrotron radiation takes energy from an
responsible for conservation of total atomic mass
accelerator beam and is related to acceleration.
(total number of nucleons) in nuclear decay and
Why would you expect the problem to be more
reactions.
severe for electron accelerators than proton
accelerators?
33.5Quarks: Is That All There Is?
3. What two major limitations prevent us from building
high-energy accelerators that are physically small? 14. The quark flavor change takes place in
4. What are the advantages of colliding-beam decay. Does this mean that the reverse quark
accelerators? What are the disadvantages? flavor change takes place in decay?
Justify your response by writing the decay in
33.4Particles, Patterns, and Conservation terms of the quark constituents, noting that it
Laws looks as if a proton is converted into a neutron in
decay.
5. Large quantities of antimatter isolated from normal
15. Explain how the weak force can change
matter should behave exactly like normal matter.
strangeness by changing quark flavor.
An antiatom, for example, composed of positrons,
16. Beta decay is caused by the weak force, as are all
antiprotons, and antineutrons should have the
reactions in which strangeness changes. Does this
same atomic spectrum as its matter counterpart.
imply that the weak force can change quark
Would you be able to tell it is antimatter by its
flavor? Explain.
emission of antiphotons? Explain briefly.
17. Why is it easier to see the properties of thec,b,
6. Massless particles are not only neutral, they are
andtquarks in mesons having composition
chargeless (unlike the neutron). Why is this so?
or rather than in baryons having a mixture of
7. Massless particles must travel at the speed of light,
quarks, such asudb?
while others cannot reach this speed. Why are all
18. How can quarks, which are fermions, combine to
massless particles stable? If evidence is found that
form bosons? Why must an even number combine
neutrinos spontaneously decay into other particles,
to form a boson? Give one example by stating the
would this imply they have mass?
quark substructure of a boson.
8. When a star erupts in a supernova explosion, huge
19. What evidence is cited to support the contention
numbers of electron neutrinos are formed in
that the gluon force between quarks is greater
nuclear reactions. Such neutrinos from the 1987A
than the strong nuclear force between hadrons?
supernova in the relatively nearby Magellanic Cloud
How is this related to color? Is it also related to
were observed within hours of the initial
quark confinement?
brightening, indicating they traveled to earth at
20. Discuss how we know that ( )
approximately the speed of light. Explain how this
are not fundamental particles and are not the
data can be used to set an upper limit on the mass
basic carriers of the strong force.
of the neutrino, noting that if the mass is small the
21. An antibaryon has three antiquarks with colors
neutrinos could travel very close to the speed of
. What is its color?
light and have a reasonable energy (on the order of
22. Suppose leptons are created in a reaction. Does
MeV).
this imply the weak force is acting? (for example,
9. Theorists have had spectacular success in
consider decay.)
predicting previously unknown particles.
Considering past theoretical triumphs, why should
we bother to perform experiments?
10. What lifetime do you expect for an antineutron
isolated from normal matter?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1515
33 • Problems & Exercises 1497
23. How can the lifetime of a particle indicate that its 27. Discuss the similarities and differences between
decay is caused by the strong nuclear force? How the photon and the in terms of particle
can a change in strangeness imply which force is properties, including forces felt.
responsible for a reaction? What does a change in 28. Identify evidence for electroweak unification.
quark flavor imply about the force that is 29. The quarks in a particle are confined, meaning
responsible? individual quarks cannot be directly observed. Are
24. (a) Do all particles having strangeness also have at gluons confined as well? Explain
least one strange quark in them?
(b) Do all hadrons with a strange quark also have 33.6GUTs: The Unification of Forces
nonzero strangeness?
30. If a GUT is proven, and the four forces are unified,
25. The sigma-zero particle decays mostly via the
it will still be correct to say that the orbit of the
reaction . Explain how this decay
moon is determined by the gravitational force.
and the respective quark compositions imply that
Explain why.
the is an excited state of the .
31. If the Higgs boson is discovered and found to have
26. What do the quark compositions and other
mass, will it be considered the ultimate carrier of
quantum numbers imply about the relationships
the weak force? Explain your response.
between the and the proton? The and the
32. Gluons and the photon are massless. Does this
neutron?
imply that the , , and are the ultimate
carriers of the weak force?
Problems & Exercises
33.1The Yukawa Particle and the 5. The ratio of the strong to the weak force and the
Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle Revisited ratio of the strong force to the electromagnetic
force become 1 under circumstances where they
1. A virtual particle having an approximate mass of
are unified. What are the ratios of the strong force
may be associated with the
to those two forces under normal circumstances?
unification of the strong and electroweak forces.
For what length of time could this virtual particle
33.3Accelerators Create Matter from
exist (in temporary violation of the conservation of
Energy
mass-energy as allowed by the Heisenberg
uncertainty principle)? 6. At full energy, protons in the 2.00-km-diameter
2. Calculate the mass in of a virtual carrier Fermilab synchrotron travel at nearly the speed of
particle that has a range limited to m by the light, since their energy is about 1000 times their
Heisenberg uncertainty principle. Such a particle rest mass energy.
might be involved in the unification of the strong (a) How long does it take for a proton to complete
and electroweak forces. one trip around?
3. Another component of the strong nuclear force is (b) How many times per second will it pass through
transmitted by the exchange of virtualK-mesons. the target area?
TakingK-mesons to have an average mass of 7. Suppose a created in a bubble chamber lives
, what is the approximate range of this for What distance does it move in
component of the strong force? this time if it is traveling at 0.900c? Since this
distance is too short to make a track, the presence
33.2The Four Basic Forces of the must be inferred from its decay
products. Note that the time is longer than the
4. (a) Find the ratio of the strengths of the weak and
given lifetime, which can be due to the
electromagnetic forces under ordinary
statistical nature of decay or time dilation.
circumstances.
8. What length track does a traveling at 0.100c
(b) What does that ratio become under
leave in a bubble chamber if it is created there and
circumstances in which the forces are unified?
lives for ? (Those moving faster or
living longer may escape the detector before
decaying.)
PAGE: 1516
1498 33 • Problems & Exercises
9. The 3.20-km-long SLAC produces a beam of 17. The decay mode of the positive tau is
50.0-GeV electrons. If there are 15,000 .
accelerating tubes, what average voltage must be (a) What energy is released?
across the gaps between them to achieve this (b) Verify that charge and lepton family numbers
energy? are conserved.
10. Because of energy loss due to synchrotron (c) The is the antiparticle of the .Verify that
radiation in the LHC at CERN, only 5.00 MeV is all the decay products of the are the
added to the energy of each proton during each antiparticles of those in the decay of the given
revolution around the main ring. How many in the text.
revolutions are needed to produce 7.00-TeV (7000 18. The principal decay mode of the sigma zero is
GeV) protons, if they are injected with an initial .
energy of 8.00 GeV? (a) What energy is released?
11. A proton and an antiproton collide head-on, with (b) Considering the quark structure of the two
each having a kinetic energy of 7.00 TeV (such as baryons, does it appear that the is an excited
in the LHC at CERN). How much collision energy is state of the ?
available, taking into account the annihilation of (c) Verify that strangeness, charge, and baryon
the two masses? (Note that this is not significantly number are conserved in the decay.
greater than the extremely relativistic kinetic (d) Considering the preceding and the short
energy.) lifetime, can the weak force be responsible? State
12. When an electron and positron collide at the SLAC why or why not.
facility, they each have 50.0 GeV kinetic energies. 19. (a) What is the uncertainty in the energy released
What is the total collision energy available, taking in the decay of a due to its short lifetime?
into account the annihilation energy? Note that the (b) What fraction of the decay energy is this,
annihilation energy is insignificant, because the
noting that the decay mode is (so that
electrons are highly relativistic.
all the mass is destroyed)?
20. (a) What is the uncertainty in the energy released
33.4Particles, Patterns, and Conservation
in the decay of a due to its short lifetime?
Laws
(b) Is the uncertainty in this energy greater than or
less than the uncertainty in the mass of the tau
13. The is its own antiparticle and decays in the
neutrino? Discuss the source of the uncertainty.
following manner: . What is the energy
of each ray if the is at rest when it decays?
33.5Quarks: Is That All There Is?
14. The primary decay mode for the negative pion is
. What is the energy release in 21. (a) Verify from its quark composition that the
MeV in this decay? particle could be an excited state of the proton.
15. The mass of a theoretical particle that may be (b) There is a spread of about 100 MeV in the
associated with the unification of the electroweak decay energy of the , interpreted as
and strong forces is . uncertainty due to its short lifetime. What is its
(a) How many proton masses is this? approximate lifetime?
(b) How many electron masses is this? (This (c) Does its decay proceed via the strong or weak
indicates how extremely relativistic the force?
accelerator would have to be in order to make the
particle, and how large the relativistic quantity
would have to be.)
16. The decay mode of the negative muon is
.
(a) Find the energy released in MeV.
(b) Verify that charge and lepton family numbers
are conserved.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1517
33 • Problems & Exercises 1499
22. Accelerators such as the Triangle Universities Meson 26. One decay mode for the eta-zero meson is
Facility (TRIUMF) in British Columbia produce
secondary beams of pions by having an intense primary (a) Find the energy released.
proton beam strike a target. Such “meson factories” (b) What is the uncertainty in the energy due to
have been used for many years to study the interaction the short lifetime?
of pions with nuclei and, hence, the strong nuclear (c) Write the decay in terms of the constituent
force. One reaction that occurs is quarks.
, where the is a very (d) Verify that baryon number, lepton numbers,
short-lived particle. The graph inFigure 33.26shows and charge are conserved.
the probability of this reaction as a function of energy. 27. One decay mode for the eta-zero meson is
The width of the bump is the uncertainty in energy due .
to the short lifetime of the . (a) Write the decay in terms of the quark
(a) Find this lifetime. constituents.
(b) Verify from the quark composition of the particles (b) How much energy is released?
that this reaction annihilates and then re-creates ad (c) What is the ultimate release of energy, given
quark and a antiquark by writing the reaction and the decay mode for the pi zero is ?
decay in terms of quarks. 28. Is the decay possible considering
(c) Draw a Feynman diagram of the production and the appropriate conservation laws? State why or
decay of the showing the individual quarks why not.
involved. 29. Is the decay possible
considering the appropriate conservation laws?
State why or why not.
30. (a) Is the decay possible
considering the appropriate conservation laws?
State why or why not.
(b) Write the decay in terms of the quark
constituents of the particles.
31. (a) Is the decay possible
considering the appropriate conservation laws?
State why or why not. (b) Write the decay in terms
of the quark constituents of the particles.
FIGURE33.26This graph shows the probability of an interaction
between a and a proton as a function of energy. The bump is 32. The only combination of quark colors that
interpreted as a very short lived particle called a . The produces a white baryon isRGB. Identify all the
approximately 100-MeV width of the bump is due to the short
color combinations that can produce a white
lifetime of the .
meson.
23. The reaction (described in the
33. (a) Three quarks form a baryon. How many
preceding problem) takes place via the strong
combinations of the six known quarks are there if
force. (a) What is the baryon number of the
all combinations are possible?
particle?
(b) This number is less than the number of known
(b) Draw a Feynman diagram of the reaction
baryons. Explain why.
showing the individual quarks involved.
34. (a) Show that the conjectured decay of the proton,
24. One of the decay modes of the omega minus is
, violates conservation of baryon
.
number and conservation of lepton number.
(a) What is the change in strangeness?
(b) What is the analogous decay process for the
(b) Verify that baryon number and charge are
antiproton?
conserved, while lepton numbers are unaffected.
35. Verify the quantum numbers given for the in
(c) Write the equation in terms of the constituent
Table 33.2by adding the quantum numbers for its
quarks, indicating that the weak force is
quark constituents as inferred fromTable 33.4.
responsible.
36. Verify the quantum numbers given for the proton
25. Repeat the previous problem for the decay mode
and neutron inTable 33.2by adding the quantum
numbers for their quark constituents as given in
Table 33.4.
PAGE: 1518
1500 33 • Problems & Exercises
37. (a) How much energy would be released if the 33.6GUTs: The Unification of Forces
proton did decay via the conjectured reaction
43. Integrated Concepts
?
The intensity of cosmic ray radiation decreases
(b) Given that the decays to two s and that
rapidly with increasing energy, but there are
the will find an electron to annihilate, what
occasionally extremely energetic cosmic rays that
total energy is ultimately produced in proton
create a shower of radiation from all the particles
decay?
they create by striking a nucleus in the
(c) Why is this energy greater than the proton’s
atmosphere as seen in the figure given below.
total mass (converted to energy)?
Suppose a cosmic ray particle having an energy of
38. (a) Find the charge, baryon number, strangeness,
converts its energy into particles with
charm, and bottomness of the particle from
masses averaging . (a) How many
its quark composition.
particles are created? (b) If the particles rain down
(b) Do the same for the particle.
on a area, how many particles are there
39. There are particles calledD-mesons. One of them
per square meter?
is the meson, which has a single positive
charge and a baryon number of zero, also the
value of its strangeness, topness, and bottomness.
It has a charm of What is its quark
configuration?
40. There are particles called bottom mesons or
B-mesons. One of them is the meson, which
has a single negative charge; its baryon number is
zero, as are its strangeness, charm, and topness.
It has a bottomness of . What is its quark
configuration?
41. (a) What particle has the quark composition ? FIGURE33.27An extremely energetic cosmic ray creates a
(b) What should its decay mode be? shower of particles on earth. The energy of these rare
42. (a) Show that all combinations of three quarks cosmic rays can approach a joule (about ) and,
after multiple collisions, huge numbers of particles are
produce integral charges. Thus baryons must have created from this energy. Cosmic ray showers have been
integral charge. observed to extend over many square kilometers.
(b) Show that all combinations of a quark and an
44. Integrated Concepts
antiquark produce only integral charges. Thus
Assuming conservation of momentum, what is the
mesons must have integral charge.
energy of each ray produced in the decay of a
neutral at rest pion, in the reaction ?
45. Integrated Concepts
What is the wavelength of a 50-GeV electron,
which is produced at SLAC? This provides an idea
of the limit to the detail it can probe.
46. Integrated Concepts
(a) Calculate the relativistic quantity
for 1.00-TeV protons produced at
Fermilab. (b) If such a proton created a having
the same speed, how long would its life be in the
laboratory? (c) How far could it travel in this time?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1519
33 • Problems & Exercises 1501
47. Integrated Concepts 51. Construct Your Own Problem
The primary decay mode for the negative pion is Consider an ultrahigh-energy cosmic ray entering
. (a) What is the energy release in the Earth’s atmosphere (some have energies
MeV in this decay? (b) Using conservation of approaching a joule). Construct a problem in
momentum, how much energy does each of the which you calculate the energy of the particle
decay products receive, given the is at rest based on the number of particles in an observed
when it decays? You may assume the muon cosmic ray shower. Among the things to consider
antineutrino is massless and has momentum are the average mass of the shower particles, the
, just like a photon. average number per square meter, and the extent
48. Integrated Concepts (number of square meters covered) of the shower.
Plans for an accelerator that produces a Express the energy in eV and joules.
secondary beam ofK-mesons to scatter from 52. Construct Your Own Problem
nuclei, for the purpose of studying the strong Consider a detector needed to observe the
force, call for them to have a kinetic energy of 500 proposed, but extremely rare, decay of an
MeV. (a) What would the relativistic quantity electron. Construct a problem in which you
be for these particles? (b) How calculate the amount of matter needed in the
detector to be able to observe the decay,
long would their average lifetime be in the
assuming that it has a signature that is clearly
laboratory? (c) How far could they travel in this
identifiable. Among the things to consider are the
time?
estimated half life (long for rare events), and the
49. Integrated Concepts
number of decays per unit time that you wish to
Suppose you are designing a proton decay
observe, as well as the number of electrons in the
experiment and you can detect 50 percent of the
detector substance.
proton decays in a tank of water. (a) How many
53. Critical Thinking(a) How much mass is converted
kilograms of water would you need to see one
to energy when a proton and antiproton annihilate
decay per month, assuming a lifetime of ?
each other? (b) How much energy is produced in
(b) How many cubic meters of water is this? (c) If
the conversion above? (c) If energy were to
the actual lifetime is , how long would you produce a proton-antiproton pair, how much
have to wait on an average to see a single proton energy would this take? (d) What characteristic
decay? other than one being antimatter is different for a
50. Integrated Concepts proton and an antiproton?
In supernovas, neutrinos are produced in huge
amounts. They were detected from the 1987A
supernova in the Magellanic Cloud, which is about
120,000 light years away from the Earth
(relatively close to our Milky Way galaxy). If
neutrinos have a mass, they cannot travel at the
speed of light, but if their mass is small, they can
get close. (a) Suppose a neutrino with a
mass has a kinetic energy of 700 keV. Find the
relativistic quantity for it. (b) If the
neutrino leaves the 1987A supernova at the same
time as a photon and both travel to Earth, how
much sooner does the photon arrive? This is not a
large time difference, given that it is impossible to
know which neutrino left with which photon and
the poor efficiency of the neutrino detectors. Thus,
the fact that neutrinos were observed within hours
of the brightening of the supernova only places an
upper limit on the neutrino’s mass. (Hint: You may
need to use a series expansion to findvfor the
neutrino, since its is so large.)
PAGE: 1520
1502 33 • Problems & Exercises
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1521
CHAPTER 34
Frontiers of Physics
FIGURE34.1This galaxy is ejecting huge jets of matter, powered by an immensely massive black hole at its center. (credit: X-ray: NASA/
CXC/CfA/R. Kraft et al.)
CHAPTER OUTLINE
34.1Cosmology and Particle Physics
34.2General Relativity and Quantum Gravity
34.3Superstrings
34.4Dark Matter and Closure
34.5Complexity and Chaos
34.6High-temperature Superconductors
34.7Some Questions We Know to Ask
INTRODUCTION TO FRONTIERS OF PHYSICS Frontiers are exciting. There is mystery, surprise, adventure, and
discovery. The satisfaction of finding the answer to a question is made keener by the fact that the answer always
leads to a new question. The picture of nature becomes more complete, yet nature retains its sense of mystery and
never loses its ability to awe us. The view of physics is beautiful looking both backward and forward in time. What
marvelous patterns we have discovered. How clever nature seems in its rules and connections. How awesome. And
we continue looking ever deeper and ever further, probing the basic structure of matter, energy, space, and time and
wondering about the scope of the universe, its beginnings and future.
You are now in a wonderful position to explore the forefronts of physics, both the new discoveries and the
unanswered questions. With the concepts, qualitative and quantitative, the problem-solving skills, the feeling for
connections among topics, and all the rest you have mastered, you can more deeply appreciate and enjoy the brief
treatments that follow. Years from now you will still enjoy the quest with an insight all the greater for your efforts.
PAGE: 1522
1504 34 • Frontiers of Physics
34.1 Cosmology and Particle Physics
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Discuss the expansion of the universe.
• Explain the Big Bang.
Look at the sky on some clear night when you are away from city lights. There you will see thousands of individual
stars and a faint glowing background of millions more. The Milky Way, as it has been called since ancient times, is an
arm of our galaxy of stars—the wordgalaxycoming from the Greek wordgalaxias, meaning milky. We know a great
deal about our Milky Way galaxy and of the billions of other galaxies beyond its fringes. But they still provoke wonder
and awe (seeFigure 34.2). And there are still many questions to be answered. Most remarkable when we view the
universe on the large scale is that once again explanations of its character and evolution are tied to the very small
scale. Particle physics and the questions being asked about the very small scales may also have their answers in the
very large scales.
FIGURE34.2Take a moment to contemplate these clusters of galaxies, photographed by the Hubble Space Telescope. Trillions of stars
linked by gravity in fantastic forms, glowing with light and showing evidence of undiscovered matter. What are they like, these myriad stars?
How did they evolve? What can they tell us of matter, energy, space, and time? (credit: NASA, ESA, K. Sharon (Tel Aviv University) and E.
Ofek (Caltech))
As has been noted in numerous Things Great and Small vignettes, this is not the first time the large has been
explained by the small and vice versa. Newton realized that the nature of gravity on Earth that pulls an apple to the
ground could explain the motion of the moon and planets so much farther away. Minute atoms and molecules
explain the chemistry of substances on a much larger scale. Decays of tiny nuclei explain the hot interior of the
Earth. Fusion of nuclei likewise explains the energy of stars. Today, the patterns in particle physics seem to be
explaining the evolution and character of the universe. And the nature of the universe has implications for
unexplored regions of particle physics.
Cosmologyis the study of the character and evolution of the universe. What are the major characteristics of the
universe as we know them today? First, there are approximately galaxies in the observable part of the
universe. An average galaxy contains more than stars, with our Milky Way galaxy being larger than average,
both in its number of stars and its dimensions. Ours is a spiral-shaped galaxy with a diameter of about 100,000 light
years and a thickness of about 2000 light years in the arms with a central bulge about 10,000 light years across. The
Sun lies about 30,000 light years from the center near the galactic plane. There are significant clouds of gas, and
there is a halo of less-dense regions of stars surrounding the main body. (SeeFigure 34.3.) Evidence strongly
suggests the existence of a large amount of additional matter in galaxies that does not produce light—the mysterious
dark matter we shall later discuss.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1523
34.1 • Cosmology and Particle Physics 1505
FIGURE34.3The Milky Way galaxy is typical of large spiral galaxies in its size, its shape, and the presence of gas and dust. We are fortunate
to be in a location where we can see out of the galaxy and observe the vastly larger and fascinating universe around us. (a) Side view. (b)
View from above. (c) The Milky Way as seen from Earth. (credits: (a) NASA, (b) Nick Risinger, (c) Andy)
Distances are great even within our galaxy and are measured in light years (the distance traveled by light in one
year). The average distance between galaxies is on the order of a million light years, but it varies greatly with
galaxies forming clusters such as shown inFigure 34.2. The Magellanic Clouds, for example, are small galaxies close
to our own, some 160,000 light years from Earth. The Andromeda galaxy is a large spiral galaxy like ours and lies 2
million light years away. It is just visible to the naked eye as an extended glow in the Andromeda constellation.
Andromeda is the closest large galaxy in our local group, and we can see some individual stars in it with our larger
telescopes. The most distant known galaxy is 14 billion light years from Earth—a truly incredible distance. (See
Figure 34.4.)
PAGE: 1524
1506 34 • Frontiers of Physics
FIGURE34.4(a) Andromeda is the closest large galaxy, at 2 million light years distance, and is very similar to our Milky Way. The blue
regions harbor young and emerging stars, while dark streaks are vast clouds of gas and dust. A smaller satellite galaxy is clearly visible. (b)
The box indicates what may be the most distant known galaxy, estimated to be 13 billion light years from us. It exists in a much older part
of the universe. (credit: NASA, ESA, G. Illingworth (University of California, Santa Cruz), R. Bouwens (University of California, Santa Cruz and
Leiden University), and the HUDF09 Team)
Consider the fact that the light we receive from these vast distances has been on its way to us for a long time. In
fact, the time in years is the same as the distance in light years. For example, the Andromeda galaxy is 2 million light
years away, so that the light now reaching us left it 2 million years ago. If we could be there now, Andromeda would
be different. Similarly, light from the most distant galaxy left it 14 billion years ago. We have an incredible view of the
past when looking great distances. We can try to see if the universe was different then—if distant galaxies are more
tightly packed or have younger-looking stars, for example, than closer galaxies, in which case there has been an
evolution in time. But the problem is that the uncertainties in our data are great. Cosmology is almost typified by
these large uncertainties, so that we must be especially cautious in drawing conclusions. One consequence is that
there are more questions than answers, and so there are many competing theories. Another consequence is that
any hard data produce a major result. Discoveries of some importance are being made on a regular basis, the
hallmark of a field in its golden age.
Perhaps the most important characteristic of the universe is that all galaxies except those in our local cluster seem
to be moving away from us at speeds proportional to their distance from our galaxy. It looks as if a gigantic
explosion, universally called theBig Bang, threw matter out some billions of years ago. This amazing conclusion is
based on the pioneering work of Edwin Hubble (1889–1953), the American astronomer. In the 1920s, Hubble first
demonstrated conclusively that other galaxies, many previously called nebulae or clouds of stars, were outside our
own. He then found that all but the closest galaxies have a red shift in their hydrogen spectra that is proportional to
their distance. The explanation is that there is acosmological red shiftdue to the expansion of space itself. The
photon wavelength is stretched in transit from the source to the observer. Double the distance, and the red shift is
doubled. While this cosmological red shift is often called a Doppler shift, it is not—space itself is expanding. There is
no center of expansion in the universe. All observers see themselves as stationary; the other objects in space
appear to be moving away from them. Hubble was directly responsible for discovering that the universe was much
larger than had previously been imagined and that it had this amazing characteristic of rapid expansion.
Universal expansion on the scale of galactic clusters (that is, galaxies at smaller distances are not uniformly
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1525
34.1 • Cosmology and Particle Physics 1507
receding from one another) is an integral part of modern cosmology. For galaxies farther away than about 50 Mly (50
million light years), the expansion is uniform with variations due to local motions of galaxies within clusters. A
representative recession velocity can be obtained from the simple formula
34.1
where is the distance to the galaxy and is theHubble constant. The Hubble constant is a central concept in
cosmology. Its value is determined by taking the slope of a graph of velocity versus distance, obtained from red shift
measurements, such as shown inFigure 34.5. We shall use an approximate value of Thus,
is an average behavior for all but the closest galaxies. For example, a galaxy 100 Mly away (as determined
by its size and brightness) typically moves away from us at a speed of
There can be variations in this speed due to so-called local motions
or interactions with neighboring galaxies. Conversely, if a galaxy is found to be moving away from us at speed of
100,000 km/s based on its red shift, it is at a distance
or . This last calculation is
approximate, because it assumes the expansion rate was the same 5 billion years ago as now. A similar calculation
in Hubble’s measurement changed the notion that the universe is in a steady state.
FIGURE34.5This graph of red shift versus distance for galaxies shows a linear relationship, with larger red shifts at greater distances,
implying an expanding universe. The slope gives an approximate value for the expansion rate. (credit: John Cub).
One of the most intriguing developments recently has been the discovery that the expansion of the universe may be
faster nowthan in the past, rather than slowing due to gravity as expected. Various groups have been looking, in
particular, at supernovas in moderately distant galaxies (less than 1 Gly) to get improved distance measurements.
Those distances are larger than expected for the observed galactic red shifts, implying the expansion was slower
when that light was emitted. This has cosmological consequences that are discussed inDark Matter and Closure.
The first results, published in 1999, are only the beginning of emerging data, with astronomy now entering a data-
rich era.
Figure 34.6shows how the recession of galaxies looks like the remnants of a gigantic explosion, the famous Big
Bang. Extrapolating backward in time, the Big Bang would have occurred between 13 and 15 billion years ago when
all matter would have been at a point. Questions instantly arise. What caused the explosion? What happened before
the Big Bang? Was there a before, or did time start then? Will the universe expand forever, or will gravity reverse it
into a Big Crunch? And is there other evidence of the Big Bang besides the well-documented red shifts?
PAGE: 1526
1508 34 • Frontiers of Physics
FIGURE34.6Galaxies are flying apart from one another, with the more distant moving faster as if a primordial explosion expelled the
matter from which they formed. The most distant known galaxies move nearly at the speed of light relative to us.
The Russian-born American physicist George Gamow (1904–1968) was among the first to note that, if there was a
Big Bang, the remnants of the primordial fireball should still be evident and should be blackbody radiation. Since the
radiation from this fireball has been traveling to us since shortly after the Big Bang, its wavelengths should be
greatly stretched. It will look as if the fireball has cooled in the billions of years since the Big Bang. Gamow and
collaborators predicted in the late 1940s that there should be blackbody radiation from the explosion filling space
with a characteristic temperature of about 7 K. Such blackbody radiation would have its peak intensity in the
microwave part of the spectrum. (SeeFigure 34.7.) In 1964, Arno Penzias and Robert Wilson, two American
scientists working with Bell Telephone Laboratories on a low-noise radio antenna, detected the radiation and
eventually recognized it for what it is.
Figure 34.7(b) shows the spectrum of this microwave radiation that permeates space and is of cosmic origin. It is
the most perfect blackbody spectrum known, and the temperature of the fireball remnant is determined from it to
be . The detection of what is now called thecosmic microwave background(CMBR) was so
important (generally considered as important as Hubble’s detection that the galactic red shift is proportional to
distance) that virtually every scientist has accepted the expansion of the universe as fact. Penzias and Wilson shared
the 1978 Nobel Prize in Physics for their discovery.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1527
34.1 • Cosmology and Particle Physics 1509
FIGURE34.7(a) The Big Bang is used to explain the present observed expansion of the universe. It was an incredibly energetic explosion
some 10 to 20 billion years ago. After expanding and cooling, galaxies form inside the now-cold remnants of the primordial fireball. (b) The
spectrum of cosmic microwave radiation is the most perfect blackbody spectrum ever detected. It is characteristic of a temperature of
2.725 K, the expansion-cooled temperature of the Big Bang’s remnant. This radiation can be measured coming from any direction in space
not obscured by some other source. It is compelling evidence of the creation of the universe in a gigantic explosion, already indicated by
galactic red shifts.
Making Connections: Cosmology and Particle Physics
There are many connections of cosmology—by definition involving physics on the largest scale—with particle
physics—by definition physics on the smallest scale. Among these are the dominance of matter over antimatter,
the nearly perfect uniformity of the cosmic microwave background, and the mere existence of galaxies.
Matter versus antimatter We know from direct observation that antimatter is rare. The Earth and the solar system
are nearly pure matter. Space probes and cosmic rays give direct evidence—the landing of the Viking probes on Mars
would have been spectacular explosions of mutual annihilation energy if Mars were antimatter. We also know that
most of the universe is dominated by matter. This is proven by the lack of annihilation radiation coming to us from
space, particularly the relative absence of 0.511-MeV rays created by the mutual annihilation of electrons and
positrons. It seemed possible that there could be entire solar systems or galaxies made of antimatter in perfect
symmetry with our matter-dominated systems. But the interactions between stars and galaxies would sometimes
bring matter and antimatter together in large amounts. The annihilation radiation they would produce is simply not
observed. Antimatter in nature is created in particle collisions and in decays, but only in small amounts that
quickly annihilate, leaving almost pure matter surviving.
PAGE: 1528
1510 34 • Frontiers of Physics
Particle physics seems symmetric in matter and antimatter. Why isn’t the cosmos? The answer is that particle
physics is not quite perfectly symmetric in this regard. The decay of one of the neutral -mesons, for example,
preferentially creates more matter than antimatter. This is caused by a fundamental small asymmetry in the basic
forces. This small asymmetry produced slightly more matter than antimatter in the early universe. If there was only
one part in more matter (a small asymmetry), the rest would annihilate pair for pair, leaving nearly pure matter
to form the stars and galaxies we see today. So the vast number of stars we observe may be only a tiny remnant of
the original matter created in the Big Bang. Here at last we see a very real and important asymmetry in nature.
Rather than be disturbed by an asymmetry, most physicists are impressed by how small it is. Furthermore, if the
universe were completely symmetric, the mutual annihilation would be more complete, leaving far less matter to
form us and the universe we know.
How can something so old have so few wrinkles? A troubling aspect of cosmic microwave background radiation
(CMBR) was soon recognized. True, the CMBR verified the Big Bang, had the correct temperature, and had a
blackbody spectrum as expected. But the CMBR wastoosmooth—it looked identical in every direction. Galaxies and
other similar entities could not be formed without the existence of fluctuations in the primordial stages of the
universe and so there should be hot and cool spots in the CMBR, nicknamed wrinkles, corresponding to dense and
sparse regions of gas caused by turbulence or early fluctuations. Over time, dense regions would contract under
gravity and form stars and galaxies. Why aren’t the fluctuations there? (This is a good example of an answer
producing more questions.) Furthermore, galaxies are observed very far from us, so that they formed very long ago.
The problem was to explain how galaxies could form so early and so quickly after the Big Bang if its remnant
fingerprint is perfectly smooth. The answer is that if you look very closely, the CMBR is not perfectly smooth, only
extremely smooth.
A satellite called the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) carried an instrument that made very sensitive and
accurate measurements of the CMBR. In April of 1992, there was extraordinary publicity of COBE’s first
results—there were small fluctuations in the CMBR. Further measurements were carried out by experiments
including NASA’s Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP), which launched in 2001. Data from WMAP
provided a much more detailed picture of the CMBR fluctuations. (SeeFigure 34.7.) These amount to temperature
fluctuations of only out of 2.7 K, better than one part in 1000. The WMAP experiment will be followed up by
the European Space Agency’s Planck Surveyor, which launched in 2009.
FIGURE34.8This map of the sky uses color to show fluctuations, or wrinkles, in the cosmic microwave background observed with the
WMAP spacecraft. The Milky Way has been removed for clarity. Red represents higher temperature and higher density, while blue is lower
temperature and density. The fluctuations are small, less than one part in 1000, but these are still thought to be the cause of the eventual
formation of galaxies. (credit: NASA/WMAP Science Team)
Let us now examine the various stages of the overall evolution of the universe from the Big Bang to the present,
illustrated inFigure 34.9. Note that scientific notation is used to encompass the many orders of magnitude in time,
energy, temperature, and size of the universe. Going back in time, the two lines approach but do not cross (there is
no zero on an exponential scale). Rather, they extend indefinitely in ever-smaller time intervals to some infinitesimal
point.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1529
34.1 • Cosmology and Particle Physics 1511
FIGURE34.9The evolution of the universe from the Big Bang onward is intimately tied to the laws of physics, especially those of particle
physics at the earliest stages. The universe is relativistic throughout its history. Theories of the unification of forces at high energies may be
verified by their shaping of the universe and its evolution.
Going back in time is equivalent to what would happen if expansion stopped and gravity pulled all the galaxies
together, compressing and heating all matter. At a time long ago, the temperature and density were too high for
stars and galaxies to exist. Before then, there was a time when the temperature was too great for atoms to exist.
And farther back yet, there was a time when the temperature and density were so great that nuclei could not exist.
Even farther back in time, the temperature was so high that average kinetic energy was great enough to create
short-lived particles, and the density was high enough to make this likely. When we extrapolate back to the point of
and production (thermal energies reaching 1 TeV, or a temperature of about ), we reach the limits of
what we know directly about particle physics. This is at a time about after the Big Bang. While may
seem to be negligibly close to the instant of creation, it is not. There are important stages before this time that are
tied to the unification of forces. At those stages, the universe was at extremely high energies and average particle
separations were smaller than we can achieve with accelerators. What happened in the early stages before
is crucial to all later stages and is possibly discerned by observing present conditions in the universe. One of these is
the smoothness of the CMBR.
Names are given to early stages representing key conditions. The stage before back to is called the
electroweak epoch, because the electromagnetic and weak forces become identical for energies above about 100
GeV. As discussed earlier, theorists expect that the strong force becomes identical to and thus unified with the
electroweak force at energies of about . The average particle energy would be this great at after
the Big Bang, if there are no surprises in the unknown physics at energies above about 1 TeV. At the immense energy
of (corresponding to a temperature of about ), the and carrier particles would be
transformed into massless gauge bosons to accomplish the unification. Before back to about , we
have Grand Unification in theGUT epoch, in which all forces except gravity are identical. At , the average
energy reaches the immense needed to unify gravity with the other forces in TOE, the Theory of
Everything. Before that time is theTOE epoch, but we have almost no idea as to the nature of the universe then,
since we have no workable theory of quantum gravity. We call the hypothetical unified forcesuperforce.
Now let us imagine starting at TOE and moving forward in time to see what type of universe is created from various
events along the way. As temperatures and average energies decrease with expansion, the universe reaches the
stage where average particle separations are large enough to see differences between the strong and electroweak
PAGE: 1530
1512 34 • Frontiers of Physics
forces (at about ). After this time, the forces become distinct in almost all interactions—they are no longer
unified or symmetric. This transition from GUT to electroweak is an example ofspontaneous symmetry breaking, in
which conditions spontaneously evolved to a point where the forces were no longer unified, breaking that symmetry.
This is analogous to a phase transition in the universe, and a clever proposal by American physicist Alan Guth in the
early 1980s ties it to the smoothness of the CMBR. Guth proposed that spontaneous symmetry breaking (like a
phase transition during cooling of normal matter) released an immense amount of energy that caused the universe
to expand extremely rapidly for the brief time from to about . This expansion may have been by an
incredible factor of or more in the size of the universe and is thus called theinflationary scenario. One result
of this inflation is that it would stretch the wrinkles in the universe nearly flat, leaving an extremely smooth CMBR.
While speculative, there is as yet no other plausible explanation for the smoothness of the CMBR. Unless the CMBR
is not really cosmic but local in origin, the distances between regions of similar temperatures are too great for any
coordination to have caused them, since any coordination mechanism must travel at the speed of light. Again,
particle physics and cosmology are intimately entwined. There is little hope that we may be able to test the
inflationary scenario directly, since it occurs at energies near , vastly greater than the limits of modern
accelerators. But the idea is so attractive that it is incorporated into most cosmological theories.
Characteristics of the present universe may help us determine the validity of this intriguing idea. Additionally, the
recent indications that the universe’s expansion rate may beincreasing(seeDark Matter and Closure) could even
imply that we areinanother inflationary epoch.
It is important to note that, if conditions such as those found in the early universe could be created in the laboratory,
we would see the unification of forces directly today. The forces have not changed in time, but the average energy
and separation of particles in the universe have. As discussed inThe Four Basic Forces, the four basic forces in
nature are distinct under most circumstances found today. The early universe and its remnants provide evidence
from times when they were unified under most circumstances.
34.2 General Relativity and Quantum Gravity
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain the effect of gravity on light.
• Discuss black hole.
• Explain quantum gravity.
When we talk of black holes or the unification of forces, we are actually discussing aspects of general relativity and
quantum gravity. We know fromSpecial Relativitythat relativity is the study of how different observers measure the
same event, particularly if they move relative to one another. Einstein’s theory ofgeneral relativitydescribes all
types of relative motion including accelerated motion and the effects of gravity. General relativity encompasses
special relativity and classical relativity in situations where acceleration is zero and relative velocity is small
compared with the speed of light. Many aspects of general relativity have been verified experimentally, some of
which are better than science fiction in that they are bizarre but true.Quantum gravityis the theory that deals with
particle exchange of gravitons as the mechanism for the force, and with extreme conditions where quantum
mechanics and general relativity must both be used. A good theory of quantum gravity does not yet exist, but one
will be needed to understand how all four forces may be unified. If we are successful, the theory of quantum gravity
will encompass all others, from classical physics to relativity to quantum mechanics—truly a Theory of Everything
(TOE).
General Relativity
Einstein first considered the case of no observer acceleration when he developed the revolutionary special theory of
relativity, publishing his first work on it in 1905. By 1916, he had laid the foundation of general relativity, again
almost on his own. Much of what Einstein did to develop his ideas was to mentally analyze certain carefully and
clearly defined situations—doing this is to perform athought experiment.Figure 34.10illustrates a thought
experiment like the ones that convinced Einstein that light must fall in a gravitational field. Think about what a
person feels in an elevator that is accelerated upward. It is identical to being in a stationary elevator in a
gravitational field. The feet of a person are pressed against the floor, and objects released from hand fall with
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1531
34.2 • General Relativity and Quantum Gravity 1513
identical accelerations. In fact, it is not possible, without looking outside, to know what is happening—acceleration
upward or gravity. This led Einstein to correctly postulate that acceleration and gravity will produce identical effects
in all situations. So, if acceleration affects light, then gravity will, too.Figure 34.10shows the effect of acceleration
on a beam of light shone horizontally at one wall. Since the accelerated elevator moves up during the time light
travels across the elevator, the beam of light strikes low, seeming to the person to bend down. (Normally a tiny
effect, since the speed of light is so great.) The same effect must occur due to gravity, Einstein reasoned, since there
is no way to tell the effects of gravity acting downward from acceleration of the elevator upward. Thus gravity affects
the path of light, even though we think of gravity as acting between masses and photons are massless.
FIGURE34.10(a) A beam of light emerges from a flashlight in an upward-accelerating elevator. Since the elevator moves up during the
time the light takes to reach the wall, the beam strikes lower than it would if the elevator were not accelerated. (b) Gravity has the same
effect on light, since it is not possible to tell whether the elevator is accelerating upward or acted upon by gravity.
Einstein’s theory of general relativity got its first verification in 1919 when starlight passing near the Sun was
observed during a solar eclipse. (SeeFigure 34.11.) During an eclipse, the sky is darkened and we can briefly see
stars. Those in a line of sight nearest the Sun should have a shift in their apparent positions. Not only was this shift
observed, but it agreed with Einstein’s predictions well within experimental uncertainties. This discovery created a
scientific and public sensation. Einstein was now a folk hero as well as a very great scientist. The bending of light by
matter is equivalent to a bending of space itself, with light following the curve. This is another radical change in our
concept of space and time. It is also another connection that any particle with mass or energy (massless photons) is
affected by gravity.
There are several current forefront efforts related to general relativity. One is the observation and analysis of
gravitational lensing of light. Another is analysis of the definitive proof of the existence of black holes. Direct
observation of gravitational waves or moving wrinkles in space is being searched for. Theoretical efforts are also
being aimed at the possibility of time travel and wormholes into other parts of space due to black holes.
Gravitational lensing As you can see inFigure 34.11, light is bent toward a mass, producing an effect much like a
converging lens (large masses are needed to produce observable effects). On a galactic scale, the light from a
distant galaxy could be “lensed” into several images when passing close by another galaxy on its way to Earth.
Einstein predicted this effect, but he considered it unlikely that we would ever observe it. A number of cases of this
effect have now been observed; one is shown inFigure 34.12. This effect is a much larger scale verification of
general relativity. But such gravitational lensing is also useful in verifying that the red shift is proportional to
PAGE: 1532
1514 34 • Frontiers of Physics
distance. The red shift of the intervening galaxy is always less than that of the one being lensed, and each image of
the lensed galaxy has the same red shift. This verification supplies more evidence that red shift is proportional to
distance. Confidence that the multiple images are not different objects is bolstered by the observations that if one
image varies in brightness over time, the others also vary in the same manner.
FIGURE34.11This schematic shows how light passing near a massive body like the Sun is curved toward it. The light that reaches the
Earth then seems to be coming from different locations than the known positions of the originating stars. Not only was this effect observed,
the amount of bending was precisely what Einstein predicted in his general theory of relativity.
FIGURE34.12(a) Light from a distant galaxy can travel different paths to the Earth because it is bent around an intermediary galaxy by
gravity. This produces several images of the more distant galaxy. (b) The images around the central galaxy are produced by gravitational
lensing. Each image has the same spectrum and a larger red shift than the intermediary. (credit: NASA, ESA, and STScI)
Black holes Black holesare objects having such large gravitational fields that things can fall in, but nothing, not
even light, can escape. Bodies, like the Earth or the Sun, have what is called anescape velocity. If an object moves
straight up from the body, starting at the escape velocity, it will just be able to escape the gravity of the body.The
greater the acceleration of gravity on the body, the greater is the escape velocity. As long ago as the late 1700s, it
was proposed that if the escape velocity is greater than the speed of light, then light cannot escape. Simon Laplace
(1749–1827), the French astronomer and mathematician, even incorporated this idea of a dark star into his
writings. But the idea was dropped after Young’s double slit experiment showed light to be a wave. For some time,
light was thought not to have particle characteristics and, thus, could not be acted upon by gravity. The idea of a
black hole was very quickly reincarnated in 1916 after Einstein’s theory of general relativity was published. It is now
thought that black holes can form in the supernova collapse of a massive star, forming an object perhaps 10 km
across and having a mass greater than that of our Sun. It is interesting that several prominent physicists who
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1533
34.2 • General Relativity and Quantum Gravity 1515
worked on the concept, including Einstein, firmly believed that nature would find a way to prohibit such objects.
Black holes are difficult to observe directly, because they are small and no light comes directly from them. In fact,
no light comes from inside theevent horizon, which is defined to be at a distance from the object at which the
escape velocity is exactly the speed of light. The radius of the event horizon is known as theSchwarzschild radius
and is given by
34.2
where is the universal gravitational constant, is the mass of the body, and is the speed of light. The event
horizon is the edge of the black hole and is its radius (that is, the size of a black hole is twice ). Since is
small and is large, you can see that black holes are extremely small, only a few kilometers for masses a little
greater than the Sun’s. The object itself is inside the event horizon.
Physics near a black hole is fascinating. Gravity increases so rapidly that, as you approach a black hole, the tidal
effects tear matter apart, with matter closer to the hole being pulled in with much more force than that only slightly
farther away. This can pull a companion star apart and heat inflowing gases to the point of producing X rays. (See
Figure 34.13.) We have observed X rays from certain binary star systems that are consistent with such a picture.
This is not quite proof of black holes, because the X rays could also be caused by matter falling onto a neutron star.
These objects were first discovered in 1967 by the British astrophysicists, Jocelyn Bell and Anthony Hewish.
Neutron starsare literally a star composed of neutrons. They are formed by the collapse of a star’s core in a
supernova, during which electrons and protons are forced together to form neutrons (the reverse of neutron
decay). Neutron stars are slightly larger than a black hole of the same mass and will not collapse further because of
resistance by the strong force. However, neutron stars cannot have a mass greater than about eight solar masses or
they must collapse to a black hole. With recent improvements in our ability to resolve small details, such as with the
orbiting Chandra X-ray Observatory, it has become possible to measure the masses of X-ray-emitting objects by
observing the motion of companion stars and other matter in their vicinity. What has emerged is a plethora of X-ray-
emitting objects too massive to be neutron stars. This evidence is considered conclusive and the existence of black
holes is widely accepted. These black holes are concentrated near galactic centers.
We also have evidence that supermassive black holes may exist at the cores of many galaxies, including the Milky
Way. Such a black hole might have a mass millions or even billions of times that of the Sun, and it would probably
have formed when matter first coalesced into a galaxy billions of years ago. Supporting this is the fact that very
distant galaxies are more likely to have abnormally energetic cores. Some of the moderately distant galaxies, and
hence among the younger, are known asquasarsand emit as much or more energy than a normal galaxy but from a
region less than a light year across. Quasar energy outputs may vary in times less than a year, so that the energy-
emitting region must be less than a light year across. The best explanation of quasars is that they are young galaxies
with a supermassive black hole forming at their core, and that they become less energetic over billions of years. In
closer superactive galaxies, we observe tremendous amounts of energy being emitted from very small regions of
space, consistent with stars falling into a black hole at the rate of one or more a month. The Hubble Space Telescope
(1994) observed an accretion disk in the galaxy M87 rotating rapidly around a region of extreme energy emission.
(SeeFigure 34.13.) A jet of material being ejected perpendicular to the plane of rotation gives further evidence of a
supermassive black hole as the engine.
FIGURE34.13A black hole is shown pulling matter away from a companion star, forming a superheated accretion disk where X rays are
emitted before the matter disappears forever into the hole. The in-fall energy also ejects some material, forming the two vertical spikes.
(See also the photograph inIntroduction to Frontiers of Physics.) There are several X-ray-emitting objects in space that are consistent with
this picture and are likely to be black holes.
Gravitational waves If a massive object distorts the space around it, like the foot of a water bug on the surface of a
PAGE: 1534
1516 34 • Frontiers of Physics
pond, then movement of the massive object should create waves in space like those on a pond.Gravitational
wavesare mass-created distortions in space that propagate at the speed of light and are predicted by general
relativity. Since gravity is by far the weakest force, extreme conditions are needed to generate significant
gravitational waves. Gravity near binary neutron star systems is so great that significant gravitational wave energy is
radiated as the two neutron stars orbit one another. American astronomers, Joseph Taylor and Russell Hulse,
measured changes in the orbit of such a binary neutron star system. They found its orbit to change precisely as
predicted by general relativity, a strong indication of gravitational waves, and were awarded the 1993 Nobel Prize.
But direct detection of gravitational waves on Earth would be conclusive. For many years, various attempts have
been made to detect gravitational waves by observing vibrations induced in matter distorted by these waves.
American physicist Joseph Weber pioneered this field in the 1960s, but no conclusive events have been observed.
(No gravity wave detectors were in operation at the time of the 1987A supernova, unfortunately.) There are now
several ambitious systems of gravitational wave detectors in use around the world. These include the LIGO (Laser
Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory) system with two laser interferometer detectors, one in the state of
Washington and another in Louisiana (SeeFigure 34.15) and the VIRGO (Variability of Irradiance and Gravitational
Oscillations) facility in Italy with a single detector.
Quantum Gravity
Black holes radiate Quantum gravity is important in those situations where gravity is so extremely strong that it
has effects on the quantum scale, where the other forces are ordinarily much stronger. The early universe was such
a place, but black holes are another. The first significant connection between gravity and quantum effects was made
by the Russian physicist Yakov Zel’dovich in 1971, and other significant advances followed from the British physicist
Stephen Hawking. (SeeFigure 34.16.) These two showed that black holes could radiate away energy by quantum
effects just outside the event horizon (nothing can escape from inside the event horizon). Black holes are, thus,
expected to radiate energy and shrink to nothing, although extremely slowly for most black holes. The mechanism is
the creation of a particle-antiparticle pair from energy in the extremely strong gravitational field near the event
horizon. One member of the pair falls into the hole and the other escapes, conserving momentum. (SeeFigure
34.17.) When a black hole loses energy and, hence, rest mass, its event horizon shrinks, creating an even greater
gravitational field. This increases the rate of pair production so that the process grows exponentially until the black
hole is nuclear in size. A final burst of particles and rays ensues. This is an extremely slow process for black holes
about the mass of the Sun (produced by supernovas) or larger ones (like those thought to be at galactic centers),
taking on the order of years or longer! Smaller black holes would evaporate faster, but they are only speculated
to exist as remnants of the Big Bang. Searches for characteristic -ray bursts have produced events attributable to
more mundane objects like neutron stars accreting matter.
FIGURE34.14This Hubble Space Telescope photograph shows the extremely energetic core of the NGC 4261 galaxy. With the superior
resolution of the orbiting telescope, it has been possible to observe the rotation of an accretion disk around the energy-producing object as
well as to map jets of material being ejected from the object. A supermassive black hole is consistent with these observations, but other
possibilities are not quite eliminated. (credit: NASA and ESA)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1535
34.2 • General Relativity and Quantum Gravity 1517
FIGURE34.15The control room of the LIGO gravitational wave detector. Gravitational waves will cause extremely small vibrations in a
mass in this detector, which will be detected by laser interferometer techniques. Such detection in coincidence with other detectors and
with astronomical events, such as supernovas, would provide direct evidence of gravitational waves. (credit: Tobin Fricke)
FIGURE34.16Stephen Hawking (b. 1942) has made many contributions to the theory of quantum gravity. Hawking is a long-time survivor
of ALS and has produced popular books on general relativity, cosmology, and quantum gravity. (credit: Lwp Kommunikáció)
FIGURE34.17Gravity and quantum mechanics come into play when a black hole creates a particle-antiparticle pair from the energy in its
gravitational field. One member of the pair falls into the hole while the other escapes, removing energy and shrinking the black hole. The
search is on for the characteristic energy.
Wormholes and time travel The subject of time travel captures the imagination. Theoretical physicists, such as
the American Kip Thorne, have treated the subject seriously, looking into the possibility that falling into a black hole
could result in popping up in another time and place—a trip through a so-called wormhole. Time travel and
wormholes appear in innumerable science fiction dramatizations, but the consensus is that time travel is not
PAGE: 1536
1518 34 • Frontiers of Physics
possible in theory. While still debated, it appears that quantum gravity effects inside a black hole prevent time travel
due to the creation of particle pairs. Direct evidence is elusive.
The shortest time Theoretical studies indicate that, at extremely high energies and correspondingly early in the
universe, quantum fluctuations may make time intervals meaningful only down to some finite time limit. Early work
indicated that this might be the case for times as long as , the time at which all forces were unified. If so,
then it would be meaningless to consider the universe at times earlier than this. Subsequent studies indicate that
the crucial time may be as short as . But the point remains—quantum gravity seems to imply that there is no
such thing as a vanishingly short time. Time may, in fact, be grainy with no meaning to time intervals shorter than
some tiny but finite size.
The future of quantum gravity Not only is quantum gravity in its infancy, no one knows how to get started on a
theory of gravitons and unification of forces. The energies at which TOE should be valid may be so high (at least
) and the necessary particle separation so small (less than ) that only indirect evidence can
provide clues. For some time, the common lament of theoretical physicists was one so familiar to struggling
students—how do you even get started? But Hawking and others have made a start, and the approach many
theorists have taken is called Superstring theory, the topic of theSuperstrings.
34.3 Superstrings
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Define Superstring theory.
• Explain the relationship between Superstring theory and the Big Bang.
Introduced earlier inGUTS: The Unification of ForcesSuperstring theoryis an attempt to unify gravity with the
other three forces and, thus, must contain quantum gravity. The main tenet of Superstring theory is that
fundamental particles, including the graviton that carries the gravitational force, act like one-dimensional vibrating
strings. Since gravity affects the time and space in which all else exists, Superstring theory is an attempt at a Theory
of Everything (TOE). Each independent quantum number is thought of as a separate dimension in some super space
(analogous to the fact that the familiar dimensions of space are independent of one another) and is represented by a
different type of Superstring. As the universe evolved after the Big Bang and forces became distinct (spontaneous
symmetry breaking), some of the dimensions of superspace are imagined to have curled up and become unnoticed.
Forces are expected to be unified only at extremely high energies and at particle separations on the order of
. This could mean that Superstrings must have dimensions or wavelengths of this size or smaller. Just as
quantum gravity may imply that there are no time intervals shorter than some finite value, it also implies that there
may be no sizes smaller than some tiny but finite value. That may be about . If so, and if Superstring theory
can explain all it strives to, then the structures of Superstrings are at the lower limit of the smallest possible size and
can have no further substructure. This would be the ultimate answer to the question the ancient Greeks considered.
There is a finite lower limit to space.
Not only is Superstring theory in its infancy, it deals with dimensions about 17 orders of magnitude smaller than the
details that we have been able to observe directly. It is thus relatively unconstrained by experiment, and
there are a host of theoretical possibilities to choose from. This has led theorists to make choices subjectively (as
always) on what is the most elegant theory, with less hope than usual that experiment will guide them. It has also
led to speculation of alternate universes, with their Big Bangs creating each new universe with a random set of rules.
These speculations may not be tested even in principle, since an alternate universe is by definition unattainable. It is
something like exploring a self-consistent field of mathematics, with its axioms and rules of logic that are not
consistent with nature. Such endeavors have often given insight to mathematicians and scientists alike and
occasionally have been directly related to the description of new discoveries.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1537
34.4 • Dark Matter and Closure 1519
34.4 Dark Matter and Closure
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Discuss the existence of dark matter.
• Explain neutrino oscillations and their consequences.
One of the most exciting problems in physics today is the fact that there is far more matter in the universe than we
can see. The motion of stars in galaxies and the motion of galaxies in clusters imply that there is about 10 times as
much mass as in the luminous objects we can see. The indirectly observed non-luminous matter is calleddark
matter. Why is dark matter a problem? For one thing, we do not know what it is. It may well be 90% of all matter in
the universe, yet there is a possibility that it is of a completely unknown form—a stunning discovery if verified. Dark
matter has implications for particle physics. It may be possible that neutrinos actually have small masses or that
there are completely unknown types of particles. Dark matter also has implications for cosmology, since there may
be enough dark matter to stop the expansion of the universe. That is another problem related to dark matter—we do
not know how much there is. We keep finding evidence for more matter in the universe, and we have an idea of how
much it would take to eventually stop the expansion of the universe, but whether there is enough is still unknown.
Evidence
The first clues that there is more matter than meets the eye came from the Swiss-born American astronomer Fritz
Zwicky in the 1930s; major work was also done by the American astronomer Vera Rubin. Zwicky measured the
velocities of stars orbiting the galaxy, using the relativistic Doppler shift of their spectra (seeFigure 34.18(a)). He
found that velocity varied with distance from the center of the galaxy, as graphed inFigure 34.18(b). If the mass of
the galaxy was concentrated in its center, as are its luminous stars, the velocities should decrease as the square root
of the distance from the center. Instead, the velocity curve is almost flat, implying that there is a tremendous
amount of matter in the galactic halo. Using instruments and methods that offered a greater degree of precision,
Rubin investigated the movement of spiral galaxies and observed that their outermost reaches were rotating as
quickly as their centers. She also calculated that the rotational velocity of galaxies should have been enough to
cause them to fly apart, unless there was a significant discrepancy between their observable matter and their actual
matter. This became known as the galaxy rotation problem, which can be "solved" by the presence of unobserved or
dark matter. Although not immediately recognized for its significance, such measurements have now been made for
many galaxies, with similar results. Further, studies of galactic clusters have also indicated that galaxies have a
mass distribution greater than that obtained from their brightness (proportional to the number of stars), which also
extends into large halos surrounding the luminous parts of galaxies. Observations of other EM wavelengths, such as
radio waves and X rays, have similarly confirmed the existence of dark matter. Take, for example, X rays in the
relatively dark space between galaxies, which indicates the presence of previously unobserved hot, ionized gas (see
Figure 34.18(c)).
Theoretical Yearnings for Closure
Is the universe open or closed? That is, will the universe expand forever or will it stop, perhaps to contract? This,
until recently, was a question of whether there is enough gravitation to stop the expansion of the universe. In the
past few years, it has become a question of the combination of gravitation and what is called thecosmological
constant.The cosmological constant was invented by Einstein to prohibit the expansion or contraction of the
universe. At the time he developed general relativity, Einstein considered that an illogical possibility. The
cosmological constant was discarded after Hubble discovered the expansion, but has been re-invoked in recent
years.
Gravitational attraction between galaxies is slowing the expansion of the universe, but the amount of slowing down
is not known directly. In fact, the cosmological constant can counteract gravity’s effect. As recent measurements
indicate, the universe is expandingfasternow than in the past—perhaps a “modern inflationary era” in which the
dark energy is thought to be causing the expansion of the present-day universe to accelerate. If the expansion rate
were affected by gravity alone, we should be able to see that the expansion rate between distant galaxies was once
greater than it is now. However, measurements show it waslessthan now. We can, however, calculate the amount
of slowing based on the average density of matter we observe directly. Here we have a definite answer—there is far
PAGE: 1538
1520 34 • Frontiers of Physics
less visible matter than needed to stop expansion. Thecritical density is defined to be the density needed to just
halt universal expansion in a universe with no cosmological constant. It is estimated to be about
34.3
However, this estimate of is only good to about a factor of two, due to uncertainties in the expansion rate of the
universe. The critical density is equivalent to an average of only a few nucleons per cubic meter, remarkably small
and indicative of how truly empty intergalactic space is. Luminous matter seems to account for roughly to
of the critical density, far less than that needed for closure. Taking into account the amount of dark matter we detect
indirectly and all other types of indirectly observed normal matter, there is only to of what is needed for
closure. If we are able to refine the measurements of expansion rates now and in the past, we will have our answer
regarding the curvature of space and we will determine a value for the cosmological constant to justify this
observation. Finally, the most recent measurements of the CMBR have implications for the cosmological constant,
so it is not simply a device concocted for a single purpose.
After the recent experimental discovery of the cosmological constant, most researchers feel that the universe
should be just barely open. Since matter can be thought to curve the space around it, we call an open universe
negatively curved. This means that you can in principle travel an unlimited distance in any direction. A universe that
is closed is calledpositively curved. This means that if you travel far enough in any direction, you will return to your
starting point, analogous to circumnavigating the Earth. In between these two is aflat (zero curvature) universe.
The recent discovery of the cosmological constant has shown the universe is very close to flat, and will expand
forever. Why do theorists feel the universe is flat? Flatness is a part of the inflationary scenario that helps explain the
flatness of the microwave background. In fact, since general relativity implies that matter creates the space in which
it exists, there is a special symmetry to a flat universe.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1539
34.4 • Dark Matter and Closure 1521
FIGURE34.18Evidence for dark matter: (a) We can measure the velocities of stars relative to their galaxies by observing the Doppler shift
in emitted light, usually using the hydrogen spectrum. These measurements indicate the rotation of a spiral galaxy. (b) A graph of velocity
versus distance from the galactic center shows that the velocity does not decrease as it would if the matter were concentrated in luminous
stars. The flatness of the curve implies a massive galactic halo of dark matter extending beyond the visible stars. (c) This is a computer-
generated image of X rays from a galactic cluster. The X rays indicate the presence of otherwise unseen hot clouds of ionized gas in the
regions of space previously considered more empty. (credit: NASA, ESA, CXC, M. Bradac (University of California, Santa Barbara), and S.
Allen (Stanford University))
What Is the Dark Matter We See Indirectly?
There is no doubt that dark matter exists, but its form and the amount in existence are two facts that are still being
studied vigorously. As always, we seek to explain new observations in terms of known principles. However, as more
discoveries are made, it is becoming more and more difficult to explain dark matter as a known type of matter.
One of the possibilities for normal matter is being explored using the Hubble Space Telescope and employing the
lensing effect of gravity on light (seeFigure 34.19). Stars glow because of nuclear fusion in them, but planets are
visible primarily by reflected light. Jupiter, for example, is too small to ignite fusion in its core and become a star, but
we can see sunlight reflected from it, since we are relatively close. If Jupiter orbited another star, we would not be
PAGE: 1540
1522 34 • Frontiers of Physics
able to see it directly. The question is open as to how many planets or other bodies smaller than about 1/1000 the
mass of the Sun are there. If such bodies pass between us and a star, they will not block the star’s light, being too
small, but they will form a gravitational lens, as discussed inGeneral Relativity and Quantum Gravity.
In a process calledmicrolensing, light from the star is focused and the star appears to brighten in a characteristic
manner. Searches for dark matter in this form are particularly interested in galactic halos because of the huge
amount of mass that seems to be there. Such microlensing objects are thus calledmassive compact halo objects,
orMACHOs. To date, a few MACHOs have been observed, but not predominantly in galactic halos, nor in the
numbers needed to explain dark matter.
MACHOs are among the most conventional of unseen objects proposed to explain dark matter. Others being actively
pursued are red dwarfs, which are small dim stars, but too few have been seen so far, even with the Hubble
Telescope, to be of significance. Old remnants of stars called white dwarfs are also under consideration, since they
contain about a solar mass, but are small as the Earth and may dim to the point that we ordinarily do not observe
them. While white dwarfs are known, old dim ones are not. Yet another possibility is the existence of large numbers
of smaller than stellar mass black holes left from the Big Bang—here evidence is entirely absent.
There is a very real possibility that dark matter is composed of the known neutrinos, which may have small, but
finite, masses. As discussed earlier, neutrinos are thought to be massless, but we only have upper limits on their
masses, rather than knowing they are exactly zero. So far, these upper limits come from difficult measurements of
total energy emitted in the decays and reactions in which neutrinos are involved. There is an amusing possibility of
proving that neutrinos have mass in a completely different way.
We have noted inParticles, Patterns, and Conservation Lawsthat there are three flavors of neutrinos ( , , and
) and that the weak interaction could change quark flavor. It should also change neutrino flavor—that is, any type
of neutrino could change spontaneously into any other, a process calledneutrino oscillations. However, this can
occur only if neutrinos have a mass. Why? Crudely, because if neutrinos are massless, they must travel at the speed
of light and time will not pass for them, so that they cannot change without an interaction. In 1999, results began to
be published containing convincing evidence that neutrino oscillations do occur. Using the Super-Kamiokande
detector in Japan, the oscillations have been observed and are being verified and further explored at present at the
same facility and others.
Neutrino oscillations may also explain the low number of observed solar neutrinos. Detectors for observing solar
neutrinos are specifically designed to detect electron neutrinos produced in huge numbers by fusion in the Sun. A
large fraction of electron neutrinos may be changing flavor to muon neutrinos on their way out of the Sun,
possibly enhanced by specific interactions, reducing the flux of electron neutrinos to observed levels. There is also a
discrepancy in observations of neutrinos produced in cosmic ray showers. While these showers of radiation
produced by extremely energetic cosmic rays should contain twice as many s as s, their numbers are nearly
equal. This may be explained by neutrino oscillations from muon flavor to electron flavor. Massive neutrinos are a
particularly appealing possibility for explaining dark matter, since their existence is consistent with a large body of
known information and explains more than dark matter. The question is not settled at this writing.
The most radical proposal to explain dark matter is that it consists of previously unknown leptons (sometimes
obtusely referred to as non-baryonic matter). These are calledweakly interacting massive particles, orWIMPs,
and would also be chargeless, thus interacting negligibly with normal matter, except through gravitation. One
proposed group of WIMPs would have masses several orders of magnitude greater than nucleons and are
sometimes calledneutralinos. Others are calledaxionsand would have masses about that of an electron
mass. Both neutralinos and axions would be gravitationally attached to galaxies, but because they are chargeless
and only feel the weak force, they would be in a halo rather than interact and coalesce into spirals, and so on, like
normal matter (seeFigure 34.20).
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1541
34.5 • Complexity and Chaos 1523
FIGURE34.19The Hubble Space Telescope is producing exciting data with its corrected optics and with the absence of atmospheric
distortion. It has observed some MACHOs, disks of material around stars thought to precede planet formation, black hole candidates, and
collisions of comets with Jupiter. (credit: NASA (crew of STS-125))
FIGURE34.20Dark matter may shepherd normal matter gravitationally in space, as this stream moves the leaves. Dark matter may be
invisible and even move through the normal matter, as neutrinos penetrate us without small-scale effect. (credit: Shinichi Sugiyama)
Some particle theorists have built WIMPs into their unified force theories and into the inflationary scenario of the
evolution of the universe so popular today. These particles would have been produced in just the correct numbers to
make the universe flat, shortly after the Big Bang. The proposal is radical in the sense that it invokes entirely new
forms of matter, in facttwoentirely new forms, in order to explain dark matter and other phenomena. WIMPs have
the extra burden of automatically being very difficult to observe directly. This is somewhat analogous to quark
confinement, which guarantees that quarks are there, but they can never be seen directly. One of the primary goals
of the LHC at CERN, however, is to produce and detect WIMPs. At any rate, before WIMPs are accepted as the best
explanation, all other possibilities utilizing known phenomena will have to be shown inferior. Should that occur, we
will be in the unanticipated position of admitting that, to date, all we know is only 10% of what exists. A far cry from
the days when people firmly believed themselves to be not only the center of the universe, but also the reason for its
existence.
34.5 Complexity and Chaos
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Explain complex systems.
• Discuss chaotic behavior of different systems.
Much of what impresses us about physics is related to the underlying connections and basic simplicity of the laws
we have discovered. The language of physics is precise and well defined because many basic systems we study are
simple enough that we can perform controlled experiments and discover unambiguous relationships. Our most
spectacular successes, such as the prediction of previously unobserved particles, come from the simple underlying
patterns we have been able to recognize. But there are systems of interest to physicists that are inherently complex.
The simple laws of physics apply, of course, but complex systems may reveal patterns that simple systems do not.
The emerging field ofcomplexityis devoted to the study of complex systems, including those outside the traditional
bounds of physics. Of particular interest is the ability of complex systems to adapt and evolve.
PAGE: 1542
1524 34 • Frontiers of Physics
What are some examples of complex adaptive systems? One is the primordial ocean. When the oceans first formed,
they were a random mix of elements and compounds that obeyed the laws of physics and chemistry. In a relatively
short geological time (about 500 million years), life had emerged. Laboratory simulations indicate that the
emergence of life was far too fast to have come from random combinations of compounds, even if driven by lightning
and heat. There must be an underlying ability of the complex system to organize itself, resulting in the self-
replication we recognize as life. Living entities, even at the unicellular level, are highly organized and systematic.
Systems of living organisms are themselves complex adaptive systems. The grandest of these evolved into the
biological system we have today, leaving traces in the geological record of steps taken along the way.
Complexity as a discipline examines complex systems, how they adapt and evolve, looking for similarities with other
complex adaptive systems. Can, for example, parallels be drawn between biological evolution and the evolution of
economic systems? Economic systems do emerge quickly, they show tendencies for self-organization, they are
complex (in the number and types of transactions), and they adapt and evolve. Biological systems do all the same
types of things. There are other examples of complex adaptive systems being studied for fundamental similarities.
Culturesshow signs of adaptation and evolution. The comparison of different cultural evolutions may bear fruit as
well as comparisons to biological evolution.Sciencealso is a complex system of human interactions, like culture and
economics, that adapts to new information and political pressure, and evolves, usually becoming more organized
rather than less. Those who studycreative thinkingalso see parallels with complex systems. Humans sometimes
organize almost random pieces of information, often subconsciously while doing other things, and come up with
brilliant creative insights. The development oflanguageis another complex adaptive system that may show similar
tendencies.Artificial intelligenceis an overt attempt to devise an adaptive system that will self-organize and evolve
in the same manner as an intelligent living being learns. These are a few of the broad range of topics being studied
by those who investigate complexity. There are now institutes, journals, and meetings, as well as popularizations of
the emerging topic of complexity.
In traditional physics, the discipline of complexity may yield insights in certain areas. Thermodynamics treats
systems on the average, while statistical mechanics deals in some detail with complex systems of atoms and
molecules in random thermal motion. Yet there is organization, adaptation, and evolution in those complex systems.
Non-equilibrium phenomena, such as heat transfer and phase changes, are characteristically complex in detail, and
new approaches to them may evolve from complexity as a discipline. Crystal growth is another example of self-
organization spontaneously emerging in a complex system. Alloys are also inherently complex mixtures that show
certain simple characteristics implying some self-organization. The organization of iron atoms into magnetic
domains as they cool is another. Perhaps insights into these difficult areas will emerge from complexity. But at the
minimum, the discipline of complexity is another example of human effort to understand and organize the universe
around us, partly rooted in the discipline of physics.
A predecessor to complexity is the topic of chaos, which has been widely publicized and has become a discipline of
its own. It is also based partly in physics and treats broad classes of phenomena from many disciplines.Chaosis a
word used to describe systems whose outcomes are extremely sensitive to initial conditions. The orbit of the planet
Pluto, for example, may be chaotic in that it can change tremendously due to small interactions with other planets.
This makes its long-term behavior impossible to predict with precision, just as we cannot tell precisely where a
decaying Earth satellite will land or how many pieces it will break into. But the discipline of chaos has found ways to
deal with such systems and has been applied to apparently unrelated systems. For example, the heartbeat of people
with certain types of potentially lethal arrhythmias seems to be chaotic, and this knowledge may allow more
sophisticated monitoring and recognition of the need for intervention.
Chaos is related to complexity. Some chaotic systems are also inherently complex; for example, vortices in a fluid as
opposed to a double pendulum. Both are chaotic and not predictable in the same sense as other systems. But there
can be organization in chaos and it can also be quantified. Examples of chaotic systems are beautiful fractal patterns
such as inFigure 34.21. Some chaotic systems exhibit self-organization, a type of stable chaos. The orbits of the
planets in our solar system, for example, may be chaotic (we are not certain yet). But they are definitely organized
and systematic, with a simple formula describing the orbital radii of the first eight planetsandthe asteroid belt.
Large-scale vortices in Jupiter’s atmosphere are chaotic, but the Great Red Spot is a stable self-organization of
rotational energy. (SeeFigure 34.22.) The Great Red Spot has been in existence for at least 400 years and is a
complex self-adaptive system.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1543
34.6 • High-temperature Superconductors 1525
The emerging field of complexity, like the now almost traditional field of chaos, is partly rooted in physics. Both
attempt to see similar systematics in a very broad range of phenomena and, hence, generate a better understanding
of them. Time will tell what impact these fields have on more traditional areas of physics as well as on the other
disciplines they relate to.
FIGURE34.21This image is related to the Mandelbrot set, a complex mathematical form that is chaotic. The patterns are infinitely fine as
you look closer and closer, and they indicate order in the presence of chaos. (credit: Gilberto Santa Rosa)
FIGURE34.22The Great Red Spot on Jupiter is an example of self-organization in a complex and chaotic system. Smaller vortices in
Jupiter’s atmosphere behave chaotically, but the triple-Earth-size spot is self-organized and stable for at least hundreds of years. (credit:
NASA)
34.6 High-temperature Superconductors
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Identify superconductors and their uses.
• Discuss the need for a high-T superconductor.
c
Superconductorsare materials with a resistivity of zero. They are familiar to the general public because of their
practical applications and have been mentioned at a number of points in the text. Because the resistance of a piece
of superconductor is zero, there are no heat losses for currents through them; they are used in magnets needing
high currents, such as in MRI machines, and could cut energy losses in power transmission. But most
superconductors must be cooled to temperatures only a few kelvin above absolute zero, a costly procedure limiting
their practical applications. In the past decade, tremendous advances have been made in producing materials that
become superconductors at relatively high temperatures. There is hope that room temperature superconductors
may someday be manufactured.
Superconductivity was discovered accidentally in 1911 by the Dutch physicist H. Kamerlingh Onnes (1853–1926)
when he used liquid helium to cool mercury. Onnes had been the first person to liquefy helium a few years earlier
and was surprised to observe the resistivity of a mediocre conductor like mercury drop to zero at a temperature of
4.2 K. We define the temperature at which and below which a material becomes a superconductor to be itscritical
temperature, denoted by . (SeeFigure 34.23.) Progress in understanding how and why a material became a
superconductor was relatively slow, with the first workable theory coming in 1957. Certain other elements were also
PAGE: 1544
1526 34 • Frontiers of Physics
found to become superconductors, but all had s less than 10 K, which are expensive to maintain. Although Onnes
received a Nobel prize in 1913, it was primarily for his work with liquid helium.
In 1986, a breakthrough was announced—a ceramic compound was found to have an unprecedented of 35 K. It
looked as if much higher critical temperatures could be possible, and by early 1988 another ceramic (this of
thallium, calcium, barium, copper, and oxygen) had been found to have (seeFigure 34.24.) The
economic potential of perfect conductors saving electric energy is immense for s above 77 K, since that is the
temperature of liquid nitrogen. Although liquid helium has a boiling point of 4 K and can be used to make materials
superconducting, it costs about $5 per liter. Liquid nitrogen boils at 77 K, but only costs about $0.30 per liter. There
was general euphoria at the discovery of these complex ceramic superconductors, but this soon subsided with the
sobering difficulty of forming them into usable wires. The first commercial use of a high temperature
superconductor is in an electronic filter for cellular phones. High-temperature superconductors are used in
experimental apparatus, and they are actively being researched, particularly in thin film applications.
FIGURE34.23A graph of resistivity versus temperature for a superconductor shows a sharp transition to zero at the critical temperature
Tc. High temperature superconductors have verifiableTcs greater than 125 K, well above the easily achieved 77-K temperature of liquid
nitrogen.
FIGURE34.24One characteristic of a superconductor is that it excludes magnetic flux and, thus, repels other magnets. The small magnet
levitated above a high-temperature superconductor, which is cooled by liquid nitrogen, gives evidence that the material is superconducting.
When the material warms and becomes conducting, magnetic flux can penetrate it, and the magnet will rest upon it. (credit: Saperaud)
The search is on for even higher superconductors, many of complex and exotic copper oxide ceramics,
sometimes including strontium, mercury, or yttrium as well as barium, calcium, and other elements. Room
temperature (about 293 K) would be ideal, but any temperature close to room temperature is relatively cheap to
produce and maintain. There are persistent reports of s over 200 K and some in the vicinity of 270 K.
Unfortunately, these observations are not routinely reproducible, with samples losing their superconducting nature
once heated and recooled (cycled) a few times (seeFigure 34.25.) They are now called USOs or unidentified
superconducting objects, out of frustration and the refusal of some samples to show high even though produced
in the same manner as others. Reproducibility is crucial to discovery, and researchers are justifiably reluctant to
claim the breakthrough they all seek. Time will tell whether USOs are real or an experimental quirk.
The theory of ordinary superconductors is difficult, involving quantum effects for widely separated electrons
traveling through a material. Electrons couple in a manner that allows them to get through the material without
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1545
34.7 • Some Questions We Know to Ask 1527
losing energy to it, making it a superconductor. High- superconductors are more difficult to understand
theoretically, but theorists seem to be closing in on a workable theory. The difficulty of understanding how electrons
can sneak through materials without losing energy in collisions is even greater at higher temperatures, where
vibrating atoms should get in the way. Discoverers of high may feel something analogous to what a politician
once said upon an unexpected election victory—“I wonder what we did right?”
FIGURE34.25(a) This graph, adapted from an article inPhysics Today, shows the behavior of a single sample of a high-temperature
superconductor in three different trials. In one case the sample exhibited a of about 230 K, whereas in the others it did not become
superconducting at all. The lack of reproducibility is typical of forefront experiments and prohibits definitive conclusions. (b) This colorful
diagram shows the complex but systematic nature of the lattice structure of a high-temperature superconducting ceramic. (credit:
en:Cadmium, Wikimedia Commons)
34.7 Some Questions We Know to Ask
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
• Identify sample questions to be asked on the largest scales.
• Identify sample questions to be asked on the intermediate scale.
• Identify sample questions to be asked on the smallest scales.
Throughout the text we have noted how essential it is to be curious and to ask questions in order to first understand
what is known, and then to go a little farther. Some questions may go unanswered for centuries; others may not
have answers, but some bear delicious fruit. Part of discovery is knowing which questions to ask. You have to know
something before you can even phrase a decent question. As you may have noticed, the mere act of asking a
question can give you the answer. The following questions are a sample of those physicists now know to ask and are
representative of the forefronts of physics. Although these questions are important, they will be replaced by others
PAGE: 1546
1528 34 • Frontiers of Physics
if answers are found to them. The fun continues.
On the Largest Scale
1. Is the universe open or closed? Theorists would like it to be just barely closed and evidence is building toward
that conclusion. Recent measurements in the expansion rate of the universe and in CMBR support a flat
universe. There is a connection to small-scale physics in the type and number of particles that may contribute
to closing the universe.
2. What is dark matter? It is definitely there, but we really do not know what it is. Conventional possibilities are
being ruled out, but one of them still may explain it. The answer could reveal whole new realms of physics and
the disturbing possibility that most of what is out there is unknown to us, a completely different form of matter.
3. How do galaxies form? They exist since very early in the evolution of the universe and it remains difficult to
understand how they evolved so quickly. The recent finer measurements of fluctuations in the CMBR may yet
allow us to explain galaxy formation.
4. What is the nature of various-mass black holes? Only recently have we become confident that many black hole
candidates cannot be explained by other, less exotic possibilities. But we still do not know much about how
they form, what their role in the history of galactic evolution has been, and the nature of space in their vicinity.
However, so many black holes are now known that correlations between black hole mass and galactic nuclei
characteristics are being studied.
5. What is the mechanism for the energy output of quasars? These distant and extraordinarily energetic objects
now seem to be early stages of galactic evolution with a supermassive black-hole-devouring material.
Connections are now being made with galaxies having energetic cores, and there is evidence consistent with
less consuming, supermassive black holes at the center of older galaxies. New instruments are allowing us to
see deeper into our own galaxy for evidence of our own massive black hole.
6. Where do the bursts come from? We see bursts of rays coming from all directions in space, indicating the
sources are very distant objects rather than something associated with our own galaxy. Some bursts finally
are being correlated with known sources so that the possibility they may originate in binary neutron star
interactions or black holes eating a companion neutron star can be explored.
On the Intermediate Scale
1. How do phase transitions take place on the microscopic scale? We know a lot about phase transitions, such as
water freezing, but the details of how they occur molecule by molecule are not well understood. Similar
questions about specific heat a century ago led to early quantum mechanics. It is also an example of a complex
adaptive system that may yield insights into other self-organizing systems.
2. Is there a way to deal with nonlinear phenomena that reveals underlying connections? Nonlinear phenomena
lack a direct or linear proportionality that makes analysis and understanding a little easier. There are
implications for nonlinear optics and broader topics such as chaos.
3. How do high- superconductors become resistanceless at such high temperatures? Understanding how they
work may help make them more practical or may result in surprises as unexpected as the discovery of
superconductivity itself.
4. There are magnetic effects in materials we do not understand—how do they work? Although beyond the scope
of this text, there is a great deal to learn in condensed matter physics (the physics of solids and liquids). We
may find surprises analogous to lasing, the quantum Hall effect, and the quantization of magnetic flux.
Complexity may play a role here, too.
On the Smallest Scale
1. Are quarks and leptons fundamental, or do they have a substructure? The higher energy accelerators that are
just completed or being constructed may supply some answers, but there will also be input from cosmology and
other systematics.
2. Why do leptons have integral charge while quarks have fractional charge? If both are fundamental and
analogous as thought, this question deserves an answer. It is obviously related to the previous question.
3. Why are there three families of quarks and leptons? First, does this imply some relationship? Second, why three
and only three families?
4. Are all forces truly equal (unified) under certain circumstances? They don’t have to be equal just because we
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1547
34.7 • Some Questions We Know to Ask 1529
want them to be. The answer may have to be indirectly obtained because of the extreme energy at which we
think they are unified.
5. Are there other fundamental forces? There was a flurry of activity with claims of a fifth and even a sixth force a
few years ago. Interest has subsided, since those forces have not been detected consistently. Moreover, the
proposed forces have strengths similar to gravity, making them extraordinarily difficult to detect in the presence
of stronger forces. But the question remains; and if there are no other forces, we need to ask why only four and
why these four.
6. Is the proton stable? We have discussed this in some detail, but the question is related to fundamental aspects
of the unification of forces. We may never know from experiment that the proton is stable, only that it is very
long lived.
7. Are there magnetic monopoles? Many particle theories call for very massive individual north- and south-pole
particles—magnetic monopoles. If they exist, why are they so different in mass and elusiveness from electric
charges, and if they do not exist, why not?
8. Do neutrinos have mass? Definitive evidence has emerged for neutrinos having mass. The implications are
significant, as discussed in this chapter. There are effects on the closure of the universe and on the patterns in
particle physics.
9. What are the systematic characteristics of high- nuclei? All elements with or less (with the
exception of 115 and 117) have now been discovered. It has long been conjectured that there may be an island
of relative stability near , and the study of the most recently discovered nuclei will contribute to our
understanding of nuclear forces.
These lists of questions are not meant to be complete or consistently important—you can no doubt add to it yourself.
There are also important questions in topics not broached in this text, such as certain particle symmetries, that are
of current interest to physicists. Hopefully, the point is clear that no matter how much we learn, there always seems
to be more to know. Although we are fortunate to have the hard-won wisdom of those who preceded us, we can look
forward to new enlightenment, undoubtedly sprinkled with surprise.
PAGE: 1548
1530 34 • Glossary
Glossary
axions a type of WIMPs having masses about 10−10 whose value is determined by taking the slope of a
of an electron mass graph of velocity versus distance, obtained from red
Big Bang a gigantic explosion that threw out matter a shift measurements
few billion years ago inflationary scenario the rapid expansion of the
black holes objects having such large gravitational universe by an incredible factor of 10−50for the brief
fields that things can fall in, but nothing, not even time from 10−35to about 10−32s
light, can escape MACHOs massive compact halo objects; microlensing
chaos word used to describe systems the outcomes objects of huge mass
of which are extremely sensitive to initial conditions microlensing a process in which light from a distant
complexity an emerging field devoted to the study of star is focused and the star appears to brighten in a
complex systems characteristic manner, when a small body (smaller
cosmic microwave background the spectrum of than about 1/1000 the mass of the Sun) passes
microwave radiation of cosmic origin between us and the star
cosmological constant a theoretical construct negatively curved an open universe that expands
intimately related to the expansion and closure of forever
the universe neutralinos a type of WIMPs having masses several
cosmological red shift the photon wavelength is orders of magnitude greater than nucleon masses
stretched in transit from the source to the observer neutrino oscillations a process in which any type of
because of the expansion of space itself neutrino could change spontaneously into any other
cosmology the study of the character and evolution neutron stars literally a star composed of neutrons
of the universe positively curved a universe that is closed and
critical density the density of matter needed to just eventually contracts
halt universal expansion Quantum gravity the theory that deals with particle
critical temperature the temperature at which and exchange of gravitons as the mechanism for the
below which a material becomes a superconductor force
dark matter indirectly observed non-luminous matter quasars the moderately distant galaxies that emit as
electroweak epoch the stage before 10−11back to much or more energy than a normal galaxy
10−34after the Big Bang Schwarzschild radius the radius of the event horizon
escape velocity takeoff velocity when kinetic energy spontaneous symmetry breaking the transition from
just cancels gravitational potential energy GUT to electroweak where the forces were no
event horizon the distance from the object at which longer unified
the escape velocity is exactly the speed of light Superconductors materials with resistivity of zero
flat (zero curvature) universe a universe that is superforce hypothetical unified force in TOE epoch
infinite but not curved Superstring theory a theory to unify gravity with the
general relativity Einstein’s theory thatdescribes all other three forces in which the fundamental
types of relative motion including accelerated particles are considered to act like one-dimensional
motion and the effects of gravity vibrating strings
gravitational waves mass-created distortions in thought experiment mental analysis of certain
space that propagate at the speed of light and that carefully and clearly defined situations to develop
are predicted by general relativity an idea
GUT epoch the time period from 10−43to 10−34after TOE epoch before 10−43after the Big Bang
the Big Bang, when Grand Unification Theory, in WIMPs weakly interacting massive particles;
which all forces except gravity are identical, chargeless leptons (non-baryonic matter)
governed the universe interacting negligibly with normal matter
Hubble constant a central concept in cosmology
Section Summary
34.1Cosmology and Particle Physics are the cosmological red shifts of its galaxies being
proportional to distance and its cosmic microwave
• Cosmology is the study of the character and
background (CMBR). Both support the notion that
evolution of the universe.
there was a gigantic explosion, known as the Big
• The two most important features of the universe
Bang that created the universe.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1549
34 • Section Summary 1531
• Galaxies farther away than our local group have, objects that seem to be early stages of galactic
on an average, a recessional velocity given by evolution.
• Neutron starsare stellar remnants, having the
where is the distance to the galaxy and is the density of a nucleus, that hint that black holes
Hubble constant, taken to have the average value could form from supernovas, too.
• Gravitational waves are wrinkles in space,
predicted by general relativity but not yet
• Explanations of the large-scale characteristics of
observed, caused by changes in very massive
the universe are intimately tied to particle physics.
objects.
• The dominance of matter over antimatter and the
• Quantum gravityis an incompletely developed
smoothness of the CMBR are two characteristics
theory that strives to include general relativity,
that are tied to particle physics.
quantum mechanics, and unification of forces
• The epochs of the universe are known back to very
(thus, a TOE).
shortly after the Big Bang, based on known laws of
• One unconfirmed connection between general
physics.
relativity and quantum mechanics is the prediction
• The earliest epochs are tied to the unification of
of characteristic radiation from just outside black
forces, with the electroweak epoch being partially
holes.
understood, the GUT epoch being speculative, and
the TOE epoch being highly speculative since it 34.3Superstrings
involves an unknown single superforce.
• Superstring theory holds that fundamental
• The transition from GUT to electroweak is called
particles are one-dimensional vibrations
spontaneous symmetry breaking. It released
analogous to those on strings and is an attempt at
energy that caused the inflationary scenario, which
a theory of quantum gravity.
in turn explains the smoothness of the CMBR.
34.4Dark Matter and Closure
34.2General Relativity and Quantum
Gravity • Dark matteris non-luminous matter detected in
and around galaxies and galactic clusters.
• Einstein’s theory of general relativityincludes
• It may be 10 times the mass of the luminous
accelerated frames and, thus, encompasses
matter in the universe, and its amount may
special relativity and gravity. Created by use of
determine whether the universe is open or closed
careful thought experiments, it has been
(expands forever or eventually stops).
repeatedly verified by real experiments.
• The determining factor is the critical densityof the
• One direct result of this behavior of nature is the
universe and the cosmological constant, a
gravitational lensingof light by massive objects,
theoretical construct intimately related to the
such as galaxies, also seen in the microlensingof
expansion and closure of the universe.
light by smaller bodies in our galaxy.
• The critical densityρ is the density needed to just
c
• Another prediction is the existence of black holes,
halt universal expansion. It is estimated to be
objects for which the escape velocity is greater
approximately 10–26kg/m3.
than the speed of light and from which nothing can
• An open universe is negatively curved, a closed
escape.
universe is positively curved, whereas a universe
• The event horizonis the distance from the object
with exactly the critical density is flat.
at which the escape velocity equals the speed of
• Dark matter’s composition is a major mystery, but
light . It is called the Schwarzschild radius
it may be due to the suspected mass of neutrinos
and is given by
or a completely unknown type of leptonic matter.
• If neutrinos have mass, they will change families, a
process known as neutrino oscillations, for which
where is the universal gravitational constant,
there is growing evidence.
and is the mass of the body.
34.5Complexity and Chaos
• Physics is unknown inside the event horizon, and
the possibility of wormholes and time travel are • Complexity is an emerging field, rooted primarily in
being studied. physics, that considers complex adaptive systems
• Candidates for black holes may power the and their evolution, including self-organization.
extremely energetic emissions of quasars, distant • Complexity has applications in physics and many
PAGE: 1550
1532 34 • Conceptual Questions
other disciplines, such as biological evolution. • Some high-temperature superconductors have
• Chaos is a field that studies systems whose verified s above 125 K, and there are reports of
properties depend extremely sensitively on some s as high as 250 K.
variables and whose evolution is impossible to
34.7Some Questions We Know to Ask
predict.
• Chaotic systems may be simple or complex. • On the largest scale, the questions which can be
• Studies of chaos have led to methods for asked may be about dark matter, dark energy,
understanding and predicting certain chaotic black holes, quasars, and other aspects of the
behaviors. universe.
• On the intermediate scale, we can query about
34.6High-temperature Superconductors
gravity, phase transitions, nonlinear phenomena,
• High-temperature superconductors are materials high- superconductors, and magnetic effects on
that become superconducting at temperatures materials.
well above a few kelvin. • On the smallest scale, questions may be about
• The critical temperature is the temperature quarks and leptons, fundamental forces, stability
below which a material is superconducting. of protons, and existence of monopoles.
Conceptual Questions
34.1Cosmology and Particle Physics 8. The decay of one type of -meson is cited as
evidence that nature favors matter over antimatter.
1. Explain why it onlyappearsthat we are at the
Since mesons are composed of a quark and an
center of expansion of the universe and why an
antiquark, is it surprising that they would
observer in another galaxy would see the same
preferentially decay to one type over another? Is
relative motion of all but the closest galaxies away
this an asymmetry in nature? Is the predominance
from her.
of matter over antimatter an asymmetry?
2. If there is no observable edge to the universe, can
9. Distances to local galaxies are determined by
we determine where its center of expansion is?
measuring the brightness of stars, called Cepheid
Explain.
variables, that can be observed individually and
3. If the universe is infinite, does it have a center?
that have absolute brightnesses at a standard
Discuss.
distance that are well known. Explain how the
4. Another known cause of red shift in light is the
measured brightness would vary with distance as
source being in a high gravitational field. Discuss
compared with the absolute brightness.
how this can be eliminated as the source of galactic
10. Distances to very remote galaxies are estimated
red shifts, given that the shifts are proportional to
based on their apparent type, which indicate the
distance and not to the size of the galaxy.
number of stars in the galaxy, and their measured
5. If some unknown cause of red shift—such as light
brightness. Explain how the measured brightness
becoming “tired” from traveling long distances
would vary with distance. Would there be any
through empty space—is discovered, what effect
correction necessary to compensate for the red
would there be on cosmology?
shift of the galaxy (all distant galaxies have
6. Olbers’s paradox poses an interesting question: If
significant red shifts)? Discuss possible causes of
the universe is infinite, then any line of sight should
uncertainties in these measurements.
eventually fall on a star’s surface. Why then is the
11. If the smallest meaningful time interval is greater
sky dark at night? Discuss the commonly accepted
than zero, will the lines inFigure 34.9ever meet?
evolution of the universe as a solution to this
paradox.
7. If the cosmic microwave background radiation
(CMBR) is the remnant of the Big Bang’s fireball, we
expect to see hot and cold regions in it. What are
two causes of these wrinkles in the CMBR? Are the
observed temperature variations greater or less
than originally expected?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1551
34 • Conceptual Questions 1533
34.2General Relativity and Quantum 20. If neutrino oscillations do occur, will they violate
Gravity conservation of the various lepton family numbers
( , , and )? Will neutrino oscillations
12. Quantum gravity, if developed, would be an
violate conservation of the total number of
improvement on both general relativity and
leptons?
quantum mechanics, but more mathematically
21. Lacking direct evidence of WIMPs as dark matter,
difficult. Under what circumstances would it be
why must we eliminate all other possible
necessary to use quantum gravity? Similarly,
explanations based on the known forms of matter
under what circumstances could general relativity
before we invoke their existence?
be used? When could special relativity, quantum
mechanics, or classical physics be used?
34.5Complexity and Chaos
13. Does observed gravitational lensing correspond to
a converging or diverging lens? Explain briefly. 22. Must a complex system be adaptive to be of
14. Suppose you measure the red shifts of all the interest in the field of complexity? Give an
images produced by gravitational lensing, such as example to support your answer.
inFigure 34.12.You find that the central image has 23. State a necessary condition for a system to be
a red shift less than the outer images, and those chaotic.
all have the same red shift. Discuss how this not
only shows that the images are of the same 34.6High-temperature Superconductors
object, but also implies that the red shift is not
24. What is critical temperature ? Do all materials
affected by taking different paths through space.
have a critical temperature? Explain why or why
Does it imply that cosmological red shifts are not
not.
caused by traveling through space (light getting
25. Explain how good thermal contact with liquid
tired, perhaps)?
nitrogen can keep objects at a temperature of 77
15. What are gravitational waves, and have they yet
K (liquid nitrogen’s boiling point at atmospheric
been observed either directly or indirectly?
pressure).
16. Is the event horizon of a black hole the actual
26. Not only is liquid nitrogen a cheaper coolant than
physical surface of the object?
liquid helium, its boiling point is higher (77 K vs.
17. Suppose black holes radiate their mass away and
4.2 K). How does higher temperature help lower
the lifetime of a black hole created by a supernova
the cost of cooling a material? Explain in terms of
is about years. How does this lifetime
the rate of heat transfer being related to the
compare with the accepted age of the universe? Is
temperature difference between the sample and
it surprising that we do not observe the predicted
its surroundings.
characteristic radiation?
34.7Some Questions We Know to Ask
34.4Dark Matter and Closure
27. For experimental evidence, particularly of
18. Discuss the possibility that star velocities at the
previously unobserved phenomena, to be taken
edges of galaxies being greater than expected is
seriously it must be reproducible or of sufficiently
due to unknown properties of gravity rather than
high quality that a single observation is
to the existence of dark matter. Would this mean,
meaningful. Supernova 1987A is not reproducible.
for example, that gravity is greater or smaller than
How do we know observations of it were valid?
expected at large distances? Are there other tests
The fifth force is not broadly accepted. Is this due
that could be made of gravity at large distances,
to lack of reproducibility or poor-quality
such as observing the motions of neighboring
experiments (or both)? Discuss why forefront
galaxies?
experiments are more subject to observational
19. How does relativistic time dilation prohibit
problems than those involving established
neutrino oscillations if they are massless?
phenomena.
28. Discuss whether you think there are limits to what
humans can understand about the laws of physics.
Support your arguments.
PAGE: 1552
1534 34 • Problems & Exercises
Problems & Exercises
34.1Cosmology and Particle Physics 9. Assuming a circular orbit for the Sun about the
center of the Milky Way galaxy, calculate its orbital
1. Find the approximate mass of the luminous matter
speed using the following information: The mass of
in the Milky Way galaxy, given it has approximately
the galaxy is equivalent to a single mass
stars of average mass 1.5 times that of our
times that of the Sun (or ), located
Sun.
30,000 ly away.
2. Find the approximate mass of the dark and
10. (a) What is the approximate force of gravity on a
luminous matter in the Milky Way galaxy. Assume
70-kg person due to the Andromeda galaxy,
the luminous matter is due to approximately
assuming its total mass is that of our Sun
stars of average mass 1.5 times that of our Sun, and
and acts like a single mass 2 Mly away? (b) What is
take the dark matter to be 10 times as massive as
the ratio of this force to the person’s weight? Note
the luminous matter.
that Andromeda is the closest large galaxy.
3. (a) Estimate the mass of the luminous matter in the
11. Andromeda galaxy is the closest large galaxy and
known universe, given there are galaxies, each
is visible to the naked eye. Estimate its brightness
containing stars of average mass 1.5 times
relative to the Sun, assuming it has luminosity
that of our Sun. (b) How many protons (the most
times that of the Sun and lies 2 Mly away.
abundant nuclide) are there in this mass? (c)
12. (a) A particle and its antiparticle are at rest
Estimate the total number of particles in the
relative to an observer and annihilate (completely
observable universe by multiplying the answer to
destroying both masses), creating two rays of
(b) by two, since there is an electron for each
equal energy. What is the characteristic -ray
proton, and then by , since there are far more
energy you would look for if searching for evidence
particles (such as photons and neutrinos) in space
of proton-antiproton annihilation? (The fact that
than in luminous matter.
such radiation is rarely observed is evidence that
4. If a galaxy is 500 Mly away from us, how fast do we
there is very little antimatter in the universe.) (b)
expect it to be moving and in what direction?
How does this compare with the 0.511-MeV
5. On average, how far away are galaxies that are
energy associated with electron-positron
moving away from us at 2.0% of the speed of light?
annihilation?
6. Our solar system orbits the center of the Milky Way
13. The average particle energy needed to observe
galaxy. Assuming a circular orbit 30,000 ly in radius
unification of forces is estimated to be .
and an orbital speed of 250 km/s, how many years
(a) What is the rest mass in kilograms of a particle
does it take for one revolution? Note that this is
that has a rest mass of ? (b) How
approximate, assuming constant speed and circular
many times the mass of a hydrogen atom is this?
orbit, but it is representative of the time for our
14. The peak intensity of the CMBR occurs at a
system and local stars to make one revolution
wavelength of 1.1 mm. (a) What is the energy in eV
around the galaxy.
of a 1.1-mm photon? (b) There are approximately
7. (a) What is the approximate speed relative to us of a
photons for each massive particle in deep
galaxy near the edge of the known universe, some
space. Calculate the energy of such photons.
10 Gly away? (b) What fraction of the speed of light
(c) If the average massive particle in space has a
is this? Note that we have observed galaxies moving
mass half that of a proton, what energy would be
away from us at greater than .
created by converting its mass to energy? (d) Does
8. (a) Calculate the approximate age of the universe
this imply that space is “matter dominated”?
from the average value of the Hubble constant,
Explain briefly.
. To do this, calculate the time
15. (a) What Hubble constant corresponds to an
it would take to travel 1 Mly at a constant expansion
approximate age of the universe of y? To get
rate of 20 km/s. (b) If deceleration is taken into
an approximate value, assume the expansion rate
account, would the actual age of the universe be
is constant and calculate the speed at which two
greater or less than that found here? Explain.
galaxies must move apart to be separated by 1
Mly (present average galactic separation) in a time
of y. (b) Similarly, what Hubble constant
corresponds to a universe approximately
-y old?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1553
34 • Problems & Exercises 1535
16. Show that the velocity of a star orbiting its galaxy 21. Construct Your Own Problem
in a circular orbit is inversely proportional to the Consider a star moving in a circular orbit at the
square root of its orbital radius, assuming the edge of a galaxy. Construct a problem in which you
mass of the stars inside its orbit acts like a single calculate the mass of that galaxy in kg and in
mass at the center of the galaxy. You may use an multiples of the solar mass based on the velocity
equation from a previous chapter to support your of the star and its distance from the center of the
conclusion, but you must justify its use and define galaxy.
all terms used.
17. The core of a star collapses during a supernova,
forming a neutron star. Angular momentum of the
core is conserved, and so the neutron star spins
rapidly. If the initial core radius is
and it collapses to 10.0 km, find the neutron star’s
angular velocity in revolutions per second, given
the core’s angular velocity was originally 1
revolution per 30.0 days.
18. Using data from the previous problem, find the
increase in rotational kinetic energy, given the
core’s mass is 1.3 times that of our Sun. Where
does this increase in kinetic energy come from?
19. Distances to the nearest stars (up to 500 ly away)
can be measured by a technique called parallax,
as shown inFigure 34.26. What are the angles
and relative to the plane of the Earth’s orbit for
a star 4.0 ly directly above the Sun?
20. (a) Use the Heisenberg uncertainty principle to
calculate the uncertainty in energy for a
corresponding time interval of . (b)
Compare this energy with the
unification-of-forces energy and discuss why they
are similar. FIGURE34.26Distances to nearby stars are measured using
triangulation, also called the parallax method. The angle of
line of sight to the star is measured at intervals six months
apart, and the distance is calculated by using the known
diameter of the Earth’s orbit. This can be done for stars up to
about 500 ly away.
34.2General Relativity and Quantum
Gravity
22. What is the Schwarzschild radius of a black hole
that has a mass eight times that of our Sun? Note
that stars must be more massive than the Sun to
form black holes as a result of a supernova.
23. Black holes with masses smaller than those
formed in supernovas may have been created in
the Big Bang. Calculate the radius of one that has
a mass equal to the Earth’s.
24. Supermassive black holes are thought to exist at
the center of many galaxies.
(a) What is the radius of such an object if it has a
mass of Suns?
(b) What is this radius in light years?
PAGE: 1554
1536 34 • Problems & Exercises
25. Construct Your Own Problem 30. To get an idea of how empty deep space is on the
Consider a supermassive black hole near the average, perform the following calculations:
center of a galaxy. Calculate the radius of such an (a) Find the volume our Sun would occupy if it had
object based on its mass. You must consider how an average density equal to the critical density of
much mass is reasonable for these large objects, thought necessary to halt the
and which is now nearly directly observed. expansion of the universe.
(Information on black holes posted on the Web by (b) Find the radius of a sphere of this volume in
NASA and other agencies is reliable, for example.) light years.
(c) What would this radius be if the density were
34.3Superstrings that of luminous matter, which is approximately
that of the critical density?
26. The characteristic length of entities in Superstring
(d) Compare the radius found in part (c) with the
theory is approximately .
4-ly average separation of stars in the arms of the
(a) Find the energy in GeV of a photon of this
Milky Way.
wavelength.
(b) Compare this with the average particle energy
34.6High-temperature Superconductors
of needed for unification of forces.
31. A section of superconducting wire carries a
34.4Dark Matter and Closure current of 100 A and requires 1.00 L of liquid
nitrogen per hour to keep it below its critical
27. If the dark matter in the Milky Way were
temperature. For it to be economically
composed entirely of MACHOs (evidence shows it
advantageous to use a superconducting wire, the
is not), approximately how many would there have
cost of cooling the wire must be less than the cost
to be? Assume the average mass of a MACHO is 1/
of energy lost to heat in the wire. Assume that the
1000 that of the Sun, and that dark matter has a
cost of liquid nitrogen is $0.30 per liter, and that
mass 10 times that of the luminous Milky Way
electric energy costs $0.10 per kW·h. What is the
galaxy with its stars of average mass 1.5
resistance of a normal wire that costs as much in
times the Sun’s mass.
wasted electric energy as the cost of liquid
28. The critical mass density needed to just halt the
nitrogen for the superconductor?
expansion of the universe is approximately
32. Critical ThinkingAssume two galaxies are
.
apart. (a) How fast are they
(a) Convert this to .
separating due to space expansion? (b) Now
(b) Find the number of neutrinos per cubic meter
suppose a third galaxy is located
needed to close the universe if their average mass
along a line that is a perpendicular bisector of the
is and they have negligible kinetic
line segment between the first two galaxies. How
energies.
fast is this galaxy separating from either of the
29. Assume the average density of the universe is 0.1
other two galaxies? (c) Why would the third galaxy
of the critical density needed for closure. What is
appear to be receding from both of the initially
the average number of protons per cubic meter,
mentioned galaxies at the same rate? (d) How
assuming the universe is composed mostly of
would the apparent motion be detected?
hydrogen?
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1555
A • Atomic Masses 1537
APPENDIX A
Atomic Masses
Atomic
Atomic Mass Atomic Percent Abundance
Number, Name Symbol Half-life,t
Number,A Mass (u) or Decay Mode 1/2
Z
1.008
0 neutron 1 10.37 min
665
1.007
1 Hydrogen 1 99.985%
825
2.014
Deuterium 2 0.015%
102
3.016
Tritium 3 12.33 y
050
3.016
2 Helium 3
030
4.002
4
603
6.015
3 Lithium 6 7.5%
121
7.016
7 92.5%
003
7.016
4 Beryllium 7 EC 53.29 d
928
9.012
9 100%
182
10.012
5 Boron 10 19.9%
937
11.009
11 80.1%
305
11.011
6 Carbon 11 EC,
432
12.000
12 98.90%
000
TABLEA1Atomic Masses
PAGE: 1556
1538 A • Atomic Masses
Atomic
Atomic Mass Atomic Percent Abundance
Number, Name Symbol Half-life,t
Number,A Mass (u) or Decay Mode 1/2
Z
13.003
13 1.10%
355
14.003
14 5730 y
241
13.005
7 Nitrogen 13 9.96 min
738
14.003
14 99.63%
074
15.000
15 0.37%
108
15.003
8 Oxygen 15 EC, 122 s
065
15.994
16 99.76%
915
17.999
18 0.200%
160
18.000
9 Fluorine 18 EC, 1.83 h
937
18.998
19 100%
403
19.992
10 Neon 20 90.51%
435
21.991
22 9.22%
383
21.994
11 Sodium 22 2.602 y
434
22.989
23 100%
767
23.990
24 14.96 h
961
TABLEA1Atomic Masses
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1557
A • Atomic Masses 1539
Atomic
Atomic Mass Atomic Percent Abundance
Number, Name Symbol Half-life,t
Number,A Mass (u) or Decay Mode 1/2
Z
23.985
12 Magnesium 24 78.99%
042
26.981
13 Aluminum 27 100%
539
27.976
14 Silicon 28 92.23% 2.62h
927
30.975
31
362
30.973
15 Phosphorus 31 100%
762
31.973
32 14.28 d
907
31.972
16 Sulfur 32 95.02%
070
34.969
35 87.4 d
031
34.968
17 Chlorine 35 75.77%
852
36.965
37 24.23%
903
39.962
18 Argon 40 99.60%
384
38.963
19 Potassium 39 93.26%
707
39.963
40 0.0117%, EC,
999
39.962
20 Calcium 40 96.94%
591
44.955
21 Scandium 45 100%
910
TABLEA1Atomic Masses
PAGE: 1558
1540 A • Atomic Masses
Atomic
Atomic Mass Atomic Percent Abundance
Number, Name Symbol Half-life,t
Number,A Mass (u) or Decay Mode 1/2
Z
47.947
22 Titanium 48 73.8%
947
50.943
23 Vanadium 51 99.75%
962
51.940
24 Chromium 52 83.79%
509
54.938
25 Manganese 55 100%
047
55.934
26 Iron 56 91.72%
939
58.933
27 Cobalt 59 100%
198
59.933
60 5.271 y
819
57.935
28 Nickel 58 68.27%
346
59.930
60 26.10%
788
62.939
29 Copper 63 69.17%
598
64.927
65 30.83%
793
63.929
30 Zinc 64 48.6%
145
65.926
66 27.9%
034
68.925
31 Gallium 69 60.1%
580
71.922
32 Germanium 72 27.4%
079
TABLEA1Atomic Masses
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1559
A • Atomic Masses 1541
Atomic
Atomic Mass Atomic Percent Abundance
Number, Name Symbol Half-life,t
Number,A Mass (u) or Decay Mode 1/2
Z
73.921
74 36.5%
177
74.921
33 Arsenic 75 100%
594
79.916
34 Selenium 80 49.7%
520
78.918
35 Bromine 79 50.69%
336
83.911
36 Krypton 84 57.0%
507
84.911
37 Rubidium 85 72.17%
794
85.909
38 Strontium 86 9.86%
267
87.905
88 82.58%
619
89.907
90 28.8 y
738
88.905
39 Yttrium 89 100%
849
89.907
90 64.1 h
152
89.904
40 Zirconium 90 51.45%
703
92.906
41 Niobium 93 100%
377
97.905
42 Molybdenum 98 24.13%
406
97.907
43 Technetium 98
215
TABLEA1Atomic Masses
PAGE: 1560
1542 A • Atomic Masses
Atomic
Atomic Mass Atomic Percent Abundance
Number, Name Symbol Half-life,t
Number,A Mass (u) or Decay Mode 1/2
Z
101.904
44 Ruthenium 102 31.6%
348
102.905
45 Rhodium 103 100%
500
105.903
46 Palladium 106 27.33%
478
106.905
47 Silver 107 51.84%
092
108.904
109 48.16%
757
113.903
48 Cadmium 114 28.73%
357
114.903
49 Indium 115 95.7%,
880
119.902
50 Tin 120 32.59%
200
120.903
51 Antimony 121 57.3%
821
129.906
52 Tellurium 130 33.8%,
229
126.904
53 Iodine 127 100%
473
130.906
131 8.040 d
114
131.904
54 Xenon 132 26.9%
144
135.907
136 8.9%
214
132.905
55 Cesium 133 100%
429
TABLEA1Atomic Masses
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1561
A • Atomic Masses 1543
Atomic
Atomic Mass Atomic Percent Abundance
Number, Name Symbol Half-life,t
Number,A Mass (u) or Decay Mode 1/2
Z
133.906
134 EC, 2.06 y
696
136.905
56 Barium 137 11.23%
812
137.905
138 71.70%
232
138.906
57 Lanthanum 139 99.91%
346
139.905
58 Cerium 140 88.48%
433
140.907
59 Praseodymium 141 100%
647
141.907
60 Neodymium 142 27.13%
719
144.912
61 Promethium 145 EC, 17.7 y
743
151.919
62 Samarium 152 26.7%
729
152.921
63 Europium 153 52.2%
225
157.924
64 Gadolinium 158 24.84%
099
158.925
65 Terbium 159 100%
342
163.929
66 Dysprosium 164 28.2%
171
164.930
67 Holmium 165 100%
319
165.930
68 Erbium 166 33.6%
290
TABLEA1Atomic Masses
PAGE: 1562
1544 A • Atomic Masses
Atomic
Atomic Mass Atomic Percent Abundance
Number, Name Symbol Half-life,t
Number,A Mass (u) or Decay Mode 1/2
Z
168.934
69 Thulium 169 100%
212
173.938
70 Ytterbium 174 31.8%
859
174.940
71 Lutecium 175 97.41%
770
179.946
72 Hafnium 180 35.10%
545
180.947
73 Tantalum 181 99.98%
992
183.950
74 Tungsten 184 30.67%
928
186.955
75 Rhenium 187 62.6%,
744
190.960
76 Osmium 191 15.4 d
920
191.961
192 41.0%
467
190.960
77 Iridium 191 37.3%
584
192.962
193 62.7%
917
194.964
78 Platinum 195 33.8%
766
196.966
79 Gold 197 100%
543
197.968
198 2.696 d
217
198.968
80 Mercury 199 16.87%
253
TABLEA1Atomic Masses
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1563
A • Atomic Masses 1545
Atomic
Atomic Mass Atomic Percent Abundance
Number, Name Symbol Half-life,t
Number,A Mass (u) or Decay Mode 1/2
Z
201.970
202 29.86%
617
204.974
81 Thallium 205 70.48%
401
205.974
82 Lead 206 24.1%
440
206.975
207 22.1%
872
207.976
208 52.4%
627
209.984
210 22.3 y
163
210.988
211 36.1 min
735
211.991
212 10.64 h
871
208.980
83 Bismuth 209 100%
374
210.987
211 2.14 min
255
209.982
84 Polonium 210 138.38 d
848
218.008
85 Astatine 218 1.6 s
684
222.017
86 Radon 222 3.82 d
570
223.019
87 Francium 223 21.8 min
733
226.025
88 Radium 226
402
TABLEA1Atomic Masses
PAGE: 1564
1546 A • Atomic Masses
Atomic
Atomic Mass Atomic Percent Abundance
Number, Name Symbol Half-life,t
Number,A Mass (u) or Decay Mode 1/2
Z
227.027
89 Actinium 227 21.8 y
750
228.028
90 Thorium 228 1.91 y
715
232.038
232 100%,
054
231.035
91 Protactinium 231
880
233.039
92 Uranium 233
628
235.043
235 0.720%,
924
236.045
236
562
238.050
238 99.2745%,
784
239.054
239 23.5 min
289
239.052
93 Neptunium 239 2.355 d
933
239.052
94 Plutonium 239
157
243.061
95 Americium 243 fission
375
245.065
96 Curium 245
483
247.070
97 Berkelium 247
300
249.074
98 Californium 249 351 y
844
TABLEA1Atomic Masses
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1565
A • Atomic Masses 1547
Atomic
Atomic Mass Atomic Percent Abundance
Number, Name Symbol Half-life,t
Number,A Mass (u) or Decay Mode 1/2
Z
254.088
99 Einsteinium 254 276 d
019
253.085
100 Fermium 253 EC, 3.00 d
173
255.091
101 Mendelevium 255 EC, 27 min
081
255.093
102 Nobelium 255 EC, 3.1 min
260
257.099
103 Lawrencium 257 EC, 0.646 s
480
261.108
104 Rutherfordium 261 1.08 min
690
262.113
105 Dubnium 262 fission 34 s
760
263.11
106 Seaborgium 263 fission 0.8 s
86
262.123
107 Bohrium 262 0.102 s
1
264.128
108 Hassium 264 0.08 ms
5
266.137
109 Meitnerium 266 3.4 ms
8
TABLEA1Atomic Masses
PAGE: 1566
1548 A • Atomic Masses
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1567
B • Selected Radioactive Isotopes 1549
APPENDIX B
Selected Radioactive Isotopes
Decay modes are , , , electron capture (EC) and isomeric transition (IT). EC results in the same daughter
nucleus as would decay. IT is a transition from a metastable excited state. Energies for decays are the
maxima; average energies are roughly one-half the maxima.
-Ray
Isotope t DecayMode(s) Energy(MeV) Percent Percent
1/2 Energy(MeV)
12.33 y 0.0186 100%
5730 y 0.156 100%
9.96 min 1.20 100%
2.602 y 0.55 90% 1.27 100%
14.28 d 1.71 100%
87.4 d 0.167 100%
0.710 100%
1.31 89%
22.3 h 0.827 87% 0.373 87%
0.618 87%
165 d 0.257 100%
27.70 d EC 0.320 10%
5.59d 3.69 28% 1.33 28%
1.43 28%
8.27 h 1.80 43% 0.169 43%
0.378 43%
44.6 d 0.273 45% 1.10 57%
0.466 55% 1.29 43%
5.271 y 0.318 100% 1.17 100%
TABLEB1Selected Radioactive Isotopes
PAGE: 1568
1550 B • Selected Radioactive Isotopes
-Ray
Isotope t DecayMode(s) Energy(MeV) Percent Percent
1/2 Energy(MeV)
1.33 100%
244.1 d EC 1.12 51%
78.3 h EC 0.0933 70%
0.185 35%
0.300 19%
others
118.5 d EC 0.121 20%
0.136 65%
0.265 68%
0.280 20%
others
18.8 d 0.69 9% 1.08 9%
1.77 91%
64.8 d EC 0.514 100%
28.8 y 0.546 100%
64.1 h 2.28 100%
6.02 h IT 0.142 100%
99.5 min IT 0.392 100%
13.0 h EC 0.159
8.040 d 0.248 7% 0.364 85%
0.607 93% others
others
32.3 h EC 0.0400 35%
0.372 32%
TABLEB1Selected Radioactive Isotopes
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1569
B • Selected Radioactive Isotopes 1551
-Ray
Isotope t DecayMode(s) Energy(MeV) Percent Percent
1/2 Energy(MeV)
0.411 25%
others
30.17 y 0.511 95% 0.662 95%
1.17 5%
12.79 d 1.035 0.030 25%
0.044 65%
0.537 24%
others
2.696 d 1.161 0.412
64.1 h EC 0.0733 100%
138.38 d 5.41 100%
4.68 5% 0.186 100%
4.87 95%
4.68 numerous <0.400%
4.22 23% 0.050 23%
4.27 77%
numerous numerous <0.250%
4.96 (max.)
5.19 11% 73%
5.23 15% 0.013 15%
5.24 73% 0.052 10%
others
Max. 5.44 0.075
5.37 88% others
TABLEB1Selected Radioactive Isotopes
PAGE: 1570
1552 B • Selected Radioactive Isotopes
-Ray
Isotope t DecayMode(s) Energy(MeV) Percent Percent
1/2 Energy(MeV)
5.32 11%
others
TABLEB1Selected Radioactive Isotopes
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1571
C • Useful Information 1553
APPENDIX C
Useful Information
This appendix is broken into several tables.
• Table C1, Important Constants
• Table C2, Submicroscopic Masses
• Table C3, Solar System Data
• Table C4, Metric Prefixes for Powers of Ten and Their Symbols
• Table C5, The Greek Alphabet
• Table C6, SI units
• Table C7, Selected British Units
• Table C8, Other Units
• Table C9, Useful Formulae
Symbol Meaning Best Value Approximate Value
Speed of light in
vacuum
Gravitational constant
Avogadro’s number
Boltzmann’s constant
Gas constant
Stefan-Boltzmann
constant
Coulomb force
constant
Charge on electron
Permittivity of free
space
Permeability of free
space
Planck’s constant
1
TABLEC1Important Constants
1 Stated values are according to the National Institute of Standards and Technology Reference on Constants, Units, and Uncertainty,
www.physics.nist.gov/cuu(http://www.physics.nist.gov/cuu)(accessed May 18, 2012). Values in parentheses are the uncertainties in the
last digits. Numbers without uncertainties are exact as defined.
PAGE: 1572
1554 C • Useful Information
Symbol Meaning Best Value Approximate Value
Electron mass
Proton mass
Neutron mass
Atomic mass unit
2
TABLEC2Submicroscopic Masses
mass
Sun average radius
Earth-sun distance (average)
mass
Earth average radius
orbital period
mass
average radius
Moon
orbital period (average)
Earth-moon distance (average)
TABLEC3Solar System Data
Prefix Symbol Value Prefix Symbol Value
tera T deci d
giga G centi c
mega M milli m
kilo k micro
hecto h nano n
TABLEC4Metric Prefixes for Powers of Ten and Their
Symbols
2 Stated values are according to the National Institute of Standards and Technology Reference on Constants, Units, and Uncertainty,
www.physics.nist.gov/cuu(http://www.physics.nist.gov/cuu)(accessed May 18, 2012). Values in parentheses are the uncertainties in the
last digits. Numbers without uncertainties are exact as defined.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1573
C • Useful Information 1555
Prefix Symbol Value Prefix Symbol Value
deka da pico p
— — femto f
TABLEC4Metric Prefixes for Powers of Ten and Their
Symbols
Alpha Eta Nu Tau
Beta Theta Xi Upsilon
Gamma Iota Omicron Phi
Delta Kappa Pi Chi
Epsilon Lambda Rho Psi
Zeta Mu Sigma Omega
TABLEC5The Greek Alphabet
Entity Abbreviation Name
Length m meter
Mass kg kilogram
Fundamental units
Time s second
Current A ampere
Supplementary unit Angle rad radian
Force newton
Energy joule
Power watt
Pressure pascal
Derived units
Frequency hertz
Electronic potential volt
Capacitance farad
Charge coulomb
TABLEC6SI Units
PAGE: 1574
1556 C • Useful Information
Entity Abbreviation Name
Resistance ohm
Magnetic field tesla
Nuclear decay rate becquerel
TABLEC6SI Units
Length
Force
Energy
Power
Pressure
TABLEC7Selected British Units
Length
Area
Volume
Mass
TABLEC8Other Units
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1575
C • Useful Information 1557
Time
Speed
Angle
Energy
Pressure
Nuclear decay rate
TABLEC8Other Units
Circumference of a circle with radius or diameter
Area of a circle with radius or diameter
Area of a sphere with radius
Volume of a sphere with radius
TABLEC9Useful Formulae
PAGE: 1576
1558 C • Useful Information
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1577
D • Glossary of Key Symbols and Notation 1559
APPENDIX D
Glossary of Key Symbols and Notation
In this glossary, key symbols and notation are briefly defined.
Symbol Definition
average (indicated by a bar over a symbol—e.g., is average velocity)
Celsius degree
Fahrenheit degree
parallel
perpendicular
proportional to
plus or minus
zero as a subscript denotes an initial value
alpha rays
angular acceleration
temperature coefficient(s) of resistivity
beta rays
sound level
volume coefficient of expansion
electron emitted in nuclear beta decay
positron decay
gamma rays
surface tension
a constant used in relativity
change in whatever quantity follows
uncertainty in whatever quantity follows
TABLED1
PAGE: 1578
1560 D • Glossary of Key Symbols and Notation
Symbol Definition
change in energy between the initial and final orbits of an electron in an atom
uncertainty in energy
difference in mass between initial and final products
number of decays that occur
change in momentum
uncertainty in momentum
change in gravitational potential energy
rotation angle
distance traveled along a circular path
uncertainty in time
proper time as measured by an observer at rest relative to the process
potential difference
uncertainty in position
permittivity of free space
viscosity
angle between the force vector and the displacement vector
angle between two lines
contact angle
direction of the resultant
Brewster's angle
critical angle
dielectric constant
decay constant of a nuclide
wavelength
TABLED1
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1579
D • Glossary of Key Symbols and Notation 1561
Symbol Definition
wavelength in a medium
permeability of free space
coefficient of kinetic friction
coefficient of static friction
electron neutrino
positive pion
negative pion
neutral pion
density
critical density, the density needed to just halt universal expansion
fluid density
average density of an object
specific gravity
characteristic time constant for a resistance and inductance or resistance and
capacitance circuit
characteristic time for a resistor and capacitor circuit
torque
upsilon meson
magnetic flux
phase angle
ohm (unit)
angular velocity
ampere (current unit)
area
cross-sectional area
TABLED1
PAGE: 1580
1562 D • Glossary of Key Symbols and Notation
Symbol Definition
total number of nucleons
acceleration
Bohr radius
centripetal acceleration
tangential acceleration
alternating current
amplitude modulation
atmosphere
baryon number
blue quark color
antiblue (yellow) antiquark color
quark flavor bottom or beauty
bulk modulus
magnetic field strength
electron’s intrinsic magnetic field
orbital magnetic field
binding energy of a nucleus—it is the energy required to completely disassemble it into
separate protons and neutrons
binding energy per nucleon
becquerel—one decay per second
capacitance (amount of charge stored per volt)
coulomb (a fundamental SI unit of charge)
total capacitance in parallel
total capacitance in series
center of gravity
TABLED1
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1581
D • Glossary of Key Symbols and Notation 1563
Symbol Definition
center of mass
quark flavor charm
specific heat
speed of light
kilocalorie
calorie
heat pump’s coefficient of performance
coefficient of performance for refrigerators and air conditioners
cosine
cotangent
cosecant
diffusion constant
displacement
quark flavor down
decibel
distance of an image from the center of a lens
distance of an object from the center of a lens
direct current
electric field strength
emf (voltage) or Hall electromotive force
electromotive force
energy of a single photon
nuclear reaction energy
relativistic total energy
TABLED1
PAGE: 1582
1564 D • Glossary of Key Symbols and Notation
Symbol Definition
total energy
ground state energy for hydrogen
rest energy
electron capture
energy stored in a capacitor
efficiency—the useful work output divided by the energy input
Carnot efficiency
energy consumed (food digested in humans)
energy stored in an inductor
energy output
emissivity of an object
antielectron or positron
electron volt
farad (unit of capacitance, a coulomb per volt)
focal point of a lens
force
magnitude of a force
restoring force
buoyant force
centripetal force
force input
net force
force output
frequency modulation
TABLED1
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1583
D • Glossary of Key Symbols and Notation 1565
Symbol Definition
focal length
frequency
resonant frequency of a resistance, inductance, and capacitance series circuit
threshold frequency for a particular material (photoelectric effect)
fundamental
first overtone
second overtone
beat frequency
magnitude of kinetic friction
magnitude of static friction
gravitational constant
green quark color
antigreen (magenta) antiquark color
acceleration due to gravity
gluons (carrier particles for strong nuclear force)
change in vertical position
height above some reference point
maximum height of a projectile
Planck's constant
photon energy
height of the image
height of the object
electric current
intensity
TABLED1
PAGE: 1584
1566 D • Glossary of Key Symbols and Notation
Symbol Definition
intensity of a transmitted wave
moment of inertia (also called rotational inertia)
intensity of a polarized wave before passing through a filter
average intensity for a continuous sinusoidal electromagnetic wave
average current
joule
Joules/psi meson
kelvin
Boltzmann constant
force constant of a spring
x rays created when an electron falls into an shell vacancy from the shell
x rays created when an electron falls into an shell vacancy from the shell
kilocalorie
translational kinetic energy
mechanical energy
kinetic energy of an ejected electron
relativistic kinetic energy
rotational kinetic energy
thermal energy
kilogram (a fundamental SI unit of mass)
angular momentum
liter
magnitude of angular momentum
self-inductance
TABLED1
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1585
D • Glossary of Key Symbols and Notation 1567
Symbol Definition
angular momentum quantum number
x rays created when an electron falls into an shell
electron total family number
muon family total number
tau family total number
heat of fusion
latent heat coefficients
orbital angular momentum
heat of sublimation
heat of vaporization
z- component of the angular momentum
angular magnification
mutual inductance
indicates metastable state
magnification
mass
mass of an object as measured by a person at rest relative to the object
meter (a fundamental SI unit of length)
order of interference
overall magnification (product of the individual magnifications)
atomic mass of a nuclide
mechanical advantage
magnification of the eyepiece
mass of the electron
TABLED1
PAGE: 1586
1568 D • Glossary of Key Symbols and Notation
Symbol Definition
angular momentum projection quantum number
mass of a neutron
magnification of the objective lens
mole
mass of a proton
spin projection quantum number
magnitude of the normal force
newton
normal force
number of neutrons
index of refraction
number of free charges per unit volume
Avogadro's number
Reynolds number
newton-meter (work-energy unit)
newtons times meters (SI unit of torque)
other energy
power
power of a lens
pressure
momentum
momentum magnitude
relativistic momentum
total momentum
TABLED1
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1587
D • Glossary of Key Symbols and Notation 1569
Symbol Definition
total momentum some time later
absolute pressure
atmospheric pressure
standard atmospheric pressure
potential energy
elastic potential energy
electric potential energy
potential energy of a spring
gauge pressure
power consumption or input
useful power output going into useful work or a desired, form of energy
latent heat
net heat transferred into a system
flow rate—volume per unit time flowing past a point
positive charge
negative charge
electron charge
charge of a proton
test charge
quality factor
activity, the rate of decay
radius of curvature of a spherical mirror
red quark color
antired (cyan) quark color
TABLED1
PAGE: 1588
1570 D • Glossary of Key Symbols and Notation
Symbol Definition
resistance
resultant or total displacement
Rydberg constant
universal gas constant
distance from pivot point to the point where a force is applied
internal resistance
perpendicular lever arm
radius of a nucleus
radius of curvature
resistivity
radiation dose unit
roentgen equivalent man
radian
relative biological effectiveness
resistor and capacitor circuit
root mean square
radius of thenth H-atom orbit
total resistance of a parallel connection
total resistance of a series connection
Schwarzschild radius
entropy
intrinsic spin (intrinsic angular momentum)
magnitude of the intrinsic (internal) spin angular momentum
shear modulus
TABLED1
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1589
D • Glossary of Key Symbols and Notation 1571
Symbol Definition
strangeness quantum number
quark flavor strange
second (fundamental SI unit of time)
spin quantum number
total displacement
secant
sine
z-component of spin angular momentum
period—time to complete one oscillation
temperature
critical temperature—temperature below which a material becomes a superconductor
tension
tesla (magnetic field strengthB)
quark flavor top or truth
time
half-life—the time in which half of the original nuclei decay
tangent
internal energy
quark flavor up
unified atomic mass unit
velocity of an object relative to an observer
velocity relative to another observer
electric potential
terminal voltage
TABLED1
PAGE: 1590
1572 D • Glossary of Key Symbols and Notation
Symbol Definition
volt (unit)
volume
relative velocity between two observers
speed of light in a material
velocity
average fluid velocity
change in potential
drift velocity
transformer input voltage
rms voltage
transformer output voltage
total velocity
propagation speed of sound or other wave
wave velocity
work
net work done by a system
watt
weight
weight of the fluid displaced by an object
total work done by all conservative forces
total work done by all nonconservative forces
useful work output
amplitude
symbol for an element
TABLED1
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1591
D • Glossary of Key Symbols and Notation 1573
Symbol Definition
notation for a particular nuclide
deformation or displacement from equilibrium
displacement of a spring from its undeformed position
horizontal axis
capacitive reactance
inductive reactance
root mean square diffusion distance
vertical axis
elastic modulus or Young's modulus
atomic number (number of protons in a nucleus)
impedance
TABLED1
PAGE: 1592
1574 D • Glossary of Key Symbols and Notation
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1593
1575
ANSWER KEY
Chapter 1
Problems & Exercises
1.
(a)
(b)
3.
.
5.
length: ; width: ; .
7.
9.
(a)
(b)
11.
2 kg
13.
(a)
(b)
15.
(a)
(b)
(c)
17.
(a) 3
(b) 3
(c) 3
19.
(a)
(b)
21.
23.
25.
PAGE: 1594
1576
27.
29.
Sample answer: heartbeats
31.
Sample answer: if an average human lifetime is taken to be about 70 years.
33.
Sample answer: 50 atoms
35.
Sample answers:
(a) cells/hummingbird
(b) cells/human
Chapter 2
Problems & Exercises
1.
(a) 7 m
(b) 7 m
(c)
3.
a.
b.
c.
5.
(a)
(b) 0 m/s
7.
9.
11.
(a)
(b) 34.3 km/h,
(c)
13.
384,000 km
15.
(a)
(b) 0 m/s
16.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1595
1577
18.
(a)
(b)
20.
(a)
(b)
21.
38.9 m/s (about 87 miles per hour)
23.
(a)
(b)
(c)
25.
(a)
(b)
(c) This result does not really make sense. If the runner starts at 9.00 m/s and decelerates at , then she
will have stopped after 4.50 s. If she continues to decelerate, she will be running backwards.
27.
29.
(a)
(b)
(c) 7.68 km to accelerate and 713 m to decelerate
31.
(a)
(b)
33.
(a)
(b)
35.
(a)
PAGE: 1596
1578
(b) . This is about 3 times the deceleration of the pilots, who were falling from thousands of meters
high!
37.
(a)
(b)
(c) , because the assumption of constant acceleration is not valid for a dragster. A dragster changes gears,
and would have a greater acceleration in first gear than second gear than third gear, etc. The acceleration would be
greatest at the beginning, so it would not be accelerating at during the last few meters, but substantially
less, and the final velocity would be less than 162 m/s.
39.
104 s
40.
(a) ;
(b)
41.
(a) ;
(b) ;
(c) ;
(d) ;
43.
45.
(a) ; ;
(b) . Unknown is distance to top of trajectory, where velocity is zero. Use equation
because it contains all known values except for , so we can solve for . Solving for gives
Dolphins measure about 2 meters long and can jump several times their length out of the water, so this is a
reasonable result.
(c)
47.
(a) 8.26 m
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1597
1579
(b) 0.717 s
49.
1.91 s
51.
(a) 94.0 m
(b) 3.13 s
53.
(a) -70.0 m/s (downward)
(b) 6.10 s
55.
(a)
(b)
57.
(a) 305 m
(b) 262 m, -29.2 m/s
(c) 8.91 s
59.
(a)
(b)
61.
63.
65.
(a) 6 m/s
(b) 12 m/s
(c)
(d) 10 s
67.
(a) Car A is traveling faster at the checkpoint because it must go past the speed of car B to reach the same distance.
(b) i. Yes, the equation is consistent with the answer because the speed of car A is only a constant away from the
correct answer. ii. Yes, the equation makes sense because .
(c)
PAGE: 1598
1580
Chapter 3
Problems & Exercises
1.
(a)
(b) , east of north
3.
north component 3.21 km, east component 3.83 km
5.
, south of west
7.
(a) , north of east
(b) , south of west
9.
, with respect to thex-axis.
11.
x-component 4.41 m/s
y-component 5.07 m/s
13.
(a) 1.56 km
(b) 120 m east
15.
North-component 87.0 km, east-component 87.0 km
17.
30.8 m, 35.8 west of north
19.
(a) , south of west
(b) , north of east
21.
18.4 km south, then 26.2 km west(b) 31.5 km at south of west, then 5.56 km at west of north
23.
, south of east
25.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1599
1581
27.
(a) 3.50 s
(b) 28.6 m/s (c) 34.3 m/s
(d) 44.7 m/s, below horizontal
29.
(a)
(b) The arrow will go over the branch.
31.
for ; for ; for .
33.
(a) 560 m/s
(b)
(c) 80.0 m. This error is not significant because it is only 1% of the answer in part (b).
35.
1.50 m, assuming launch angle of
37.
yes, the ball lands at 5.3 m from the net
39.
(a) −0.486 m
(b) The larger the muzzle velocity, the smaller the deviation in the vertical direction, because the time of flight would
be smaller. Air resistance would have the effect of decreasing the time of flight, therefore increasing the vertical
deviation.
41.
4.23 m. No, the owl is not lucky; he misses the nest.
43.
No, the maximum range (neglecting air resistance) is about 92 m.
45.
15.0 m/s
47.
(a) 24.2 m/s
(b) The ball travels a total of 57.4 m with the brief gust of wind.
49.
,
so that
and substituting for gives:
PAGE: 1600
1582
since the range is:
.
52.
(a) , south of east
(b) , south of east
(c) , south of east
54.
(a) 0.70 m/s faster
(b) Second runner wins
(c) 4.17 m
56.
,
58.
(a) , south of west
(b) The wind should make the plane travel slower and more to the south, which is what was calculated.
60.
(a) 63.5 m/s
(b) 29.6 m/s
62.
, south of west
64.
(a)
(b) 20.2 billion years
66.
, north of east
71.
(a) Since , then B reaches the greatest height.
(b) i. Yes, it is consistent because . ii. No, it does not make sense becauseyis proportional to .
(c)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1601
1583
Chapter 4
Problems & Exercises
1.
265 N
3.
7.
(a) .
(b) The acceleration is not one-fourth of what it was with all rockets burning because the frictional force is still as
large as it was with all rockets burning.
9.
(a) The system is the child in the wagon plus the wagon.
(b)
(c) in the direction of the second child’s push.
(d)
11.
(a) . This force is 5.00 times greater than his weight.
(b)
13.
15.
Force on shell:
Force exerted on ship = , by Newton’s third law
17.
a.
b.
19.
(a)
(b) . This is 2.41 times the tension in the vertical strand.
21.
Newton’s second law applied in vertical direction gives
PAGE: 1602
1584
23.
Using the free-body diagram:
,
so that
.
25.
1. Use Newton’s laws of motion.
2. Given : ,
Find: .
3. so that .
. The force exerted by the high-jumper is actually down on
the ground, but is up from the ground and makes him jump.
4. This result is reasonable, since it is quite possible for a person to exert a force of the magnitude of .
27.
(a)
(b)
29.
(a)
(b)
31.
, north of east
33.
1. Use Newton’s laws since we are looking for forces.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1603
1585
2. Draw a free-body diagram:
3. The tension is given as Find Using Newton’s laws gives: so that applied force is due to
they-components of the two tensions:
Thex-components of the tension cancel. .
4. This seems reasonable, since the applied tensions should be greater than the force applied to the tooth.
40.
42.
44.
(a)
(b) 2.97 m
46.
(a)
(b)
(c)
48.
(a) 47.1 m/s
(b)
(c) . The average force is 252 times the shell’s weight.
52.
(a)
(b)
54.
PAGE: 1604
1586
55.
(a) Box A travels faster at the finishing distance since a greater force with equal mass results in a greater
acceleration. Also, a greater acceleration over the same distance results in a greater final speed.
(b) i. Yes, it is consistent because a greater force results in a greater final speed. ii. It does not make sense because
.
(c)
Chapter 5
Problems & Exercises
1.
4.
(a) 588 N
(b)
6.
(a) 3.29 m/s2
(b) 3.52 m/s2
(c) 980 N; 945 N
10.
14.
(a)
(b)
(c)
16.
(a)
(b)
18.
(a)
(b)
20.
22.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1605
1587
24.
26.
28.
29.
31.
(a)1 mm
(b) This does seem reasonable, since the lead does seem to shrink a little when you push on it.
33.
(a)9 cm
(b)This seems reasonable for nylon climbing rope, since it is not supposed to stretch that much.
35.
8.59 mm
37.
39.
(a)
(b)
41.
. This is about 36 atm, greater than a typical jar can withstand.
43.
1.4 cm
45.
(a) Bead A has the larger radius because both have the same weight and drag force. Since A takes longer to fall, its
speed is less and, therefore, it must have larger area or radius.
(b) i. This equation is not consistent because it shows that the bead that took longer to fall has a smaller radius. ii. It
does not make sense becauseris proportional tot.
(c)
Chapter 6
Problems & Exercises
1.
723 km
3.
PAGE: 1606
1588
5.
117 rad/s
7.
76.2 rad/s
728 rpm
8.
(a) 33.3 rad/s
(b) 500 N
(c) 40.8 m
10.
12.9 rev/min
12.
14.
a) ,
b)
16.
a)
b)
c)
d)The centripetal acceleration felt by Olympic skaters is 12 times larger than the acceleration due to gravity. That’s
quite a lot of acceleration in itself. The centripetal acceleration felt by Button’s nose was 39.2 times larger than the
acceleration due to gravity. It is no wonder that he ruptured small blood vessels in his spins.
18.
a) 0.524 km/s
b) 29.7 km/s
20.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
21.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1607
1589
(d) , that is, the normal force (upward) is three times her weight.
(e) This answer seems reasonable, since she feels like she’s being forced into the chair MUCH stronger than just by
gravity.
22.
a)
b) 905 N
c) The force in part (b) is very large. The acceleration in part (a) is too much, about 4 g.
d) The speed of the swing is too large. At the given velocity at the bottom of the swing, there is enough kinetic
energy to send the child all the way over the top, ignoring friction.
23.
a) 483 N
b) 17.4 N
c) 2.24 times her weight, 0.0807 times her weight
25.
27.
a) 24.6 m
b)
c) This does not seem too large, but it is clear that bobsledders feel a lot of force on them going
through sharply banked turns.
29.
a) 2.56 rad/s
b)
30.
a) 16.2 m/s
b) 0.234
32.
a) 1.84
b) A coefficient of friction this much greater than 1 is unreasonable .
c) The assumed speed is too great for the tight curve.
33.
a)
b) This is identical to the best value to three significant figures.
PAGE: 1608
1590
35.
a)
b)
37.
a)
b)
The values are nearly identical. One would expect the gravitational force to be the same as the centripetal force at
the core of the system.
39.
a)
b) ,
41.
a)
b)
42.
a)
b)
of the Earth’s mass.
c) The mass of the mountain and its fraction of the Earth’s mass are too great.
d) The gravitational force assumed to be exerted by the mountain is too great.
44.
46.
48.
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)
49.
a)
b) This radius is unreasonable because it is less than the radius of earth.
c) The premise of a one-hour orbit is inconsistent with the known radius of the earth.
51.
(a) The normal force is greatest at point B. At point A, the normal force and the weight are the net force; at point B,
only the normal force points in the same direction as the net force.
(b) i. This is not consistent because a larger radius should decease the net force and tension, not increase it. ii. This
does not make sense because .
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1609
1591
(c)
Chapter 7
Problems & Exercises
1.
3.
(a)
(b)
(c) The net force is zero.
5.
7.
(a)
(b) 0
(c) 700 J
(d) 38.6 N
(e) 0
9.
11.
13.
15.
102 N
16.
(a) ×
(b) The ratio of gravitational potential energy in the lake to the energy stored in the bomb is 0.52. That is, the energy
stored in the lake is approximately half that in a 9-megaton fusion bomb.
18.
(a) 1.8 J
(b) 8.6 J
20.
PAGE: 1610
1592
22.
×
24.
9.46 m/s
26.
×
27.
Equating and , we obtain
29.
(a)
(b) This is much, much longer than human time scales.
30.
×
32.
(a) 40
(b) 8 million
34.
$149
36.
(a)
(b) 141 s
38.
(a) 3.20 s
(b) 4.04 s
40.
(a) ×
(b)
42.
Identify knowns: , , ,
Identify unknowns: power of the car, force that car applies to road
Solve for unknown:
where is parallel to the incline and must oppose the resistive forces and the force of gravity:
Insert this into the expression for power and solve:
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1611
1593
About 28 kW (or about 37 hp) is reasonable for a car to climb a gentle incline.
44.
(a) 9.5 min
(b) 69 flights of stairs
46.
641 W, 0.860 hp
48.
31 g
50.
14.3%
52.
(a) ×
(b) ×
(c) Ratio of net force to weight of person is 41.0 in part (a); 3.00 in part (b)
54.
(a) 108 kJ
(b) 599 W
56.
(a) 144 J
(b) 288 W
58.
(a) ×
(b) 2.52%
(c) × (14 metric tons)
60.
(a) 294 N
(b) 118 J
(c) 49.0 W
62.
(a)
(b)
(c) Assuming the acceleration of the swimmer decreases linearly with time over the 5.00 s interval, the frictional
force must therefore be increasing linearly with time, since . If the acceleration decreases linearly with
time, the velocity will contain a term dependent on time squared ( ). Therefore, the water resistance will not
depend linearly on the velocity.
64.
(a)
(b)
(c) 5.66 m/s
PAGE: 1612
1594
(d) 4.00 kJ
66.
(a)
(b) 38.8 kcal/min
(c) This power output is higher than the highest value onTable 7.5, which is about 35 kcal/min (corresponding to
2415 watts) for sprinting.
(d) It would be impossible to maintain this power output for 2 hours (imagine sprinting for 2 hours!).
69.
(a) 4.32 m/s
(b)
(c) 8.93 kW
70.
(a) Box A has the greatest speed since it has the greatest work done; work equals change in kinetic energy and thus
fastest speed.
(b) i. Yes, this equation is consistent. An increased force or distance increases the work done, and thus increases the
change in kinesthetic energy. ii. No, this equation does not make sense.
(c)
Chapter 8
Problems & Exercises
1.
(a)
(b) 625 to 1
(c)
3.
(a)
(b)
(c) Because the momentum of the airplane is 3 orders of magnitude smaller than of the ship, the ship will not recoil
very much. The recoil would be , which is probably not noticeable.
5.
54 s
7.
9.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1613
1595
a) toward the leg
b) The force on each hand would have the same magnitude as that found in part (a) (but in opposite directions by
Newton’s third law) because the change in momentum and the time interval are the same.
11.
a) away from the wall
b) away from the wall
13.
(a) away from the dashboard
(b) away from the dashboard
15.
in the boat’s original direction of motion
17.
away from the wall
19.
21.
60.0 g
23.
0.122 m/s
25.
In a collision with an identical car, momentum is conserved. Afterwards for both cars. The change in
momentum will be the same as in the crash with the tree. However, the force on the body is not determined since
the time is not known. A padded stop will reduce injurious force on body.
27.
22.4 m/s in the same direction as the original motion
29.
0.250 m/s
31.
(a) 86.4 N perpendicularly away from the bumper
(b) 0.389 J
(c) 64.0%
33.
(a) 8.06 m/s
(b) -56.0 J
(c)(i) 7.88 m/s; (ii) -223 J
35.
(a) 0.163 m/s in the direction of motion of the more massive satellite
(b) 81.6 J
PAGE: 1614
1596
(c) in the direction of motion of the less massive satellite, 81.5 J. Because there are no external
forces, the velocity of the center of mass of the two-satellite system is unchanged by the collision. The two
velocities calculated above are the velocity of the center of mass in each of the two different individual reference
frames. The loss in KE is the same in both reference frames because the KE lost to internal forces (heat, friction,
etc.) is the same regardless of the coordinate system chosen.
37.
0.704 m/s
–2.25 m/s
38.
(a) 4.58 m/s away from the bullet
(b) 31.5 J
(c) –0.491 m/s
(d) 3.38 J
40.
(a)
(b) (almost all KE lost)
(c) Recoil speed is , energy lost is . The plume will not affect the momentum result
because the plume is still part of the Moon system. The plume may affect the kinetic energy result because a
significant part of the initial kinetic energy may be transferred to the kinetic energy of the plume particles.
42.
24.8 m/s
44.
(a) 4.00 kg
(b) 210 J
(c) The clown does work to throw the barbell, so the kinetic energy comes from the muscles of the clown. The
muscles convert the chemical potential energy of ATP into kinetic energy.
45.
(a) 3.00 m/s, below -axis
′
(b) Find speed of first puck after collision:
Verify that ratio of initial to final KE equals one:
47.
(a)
(b)
(c) The ground will exert a normal force to oppose recoil of the cannon in the vertical direction. The momentum in
the vertical direction is transferred to the earth. The energy is transferred into the ground, making a dent where the
cannon is. After long barrages, cannon have erratic aim because the ground is full of divots.
49.
(a) at
(b)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1615
1597
51.
We are given that . The given equations then become:
and
Square each equation to get
Add these two equations and simplify:
Multiply the entire equation by to recover the kinetic energy:
53.
55.
57.
The force needed to give a small mass an acceleration is . To accelerate this mass in the small
time interval requires , so . By Newton’s third law, this force is equal in magnitude to the
thrust force acting on the rocket, so , where all quantities are positive. Applying Newton’s second
law to the rocket gives , where is the mass of the rocket and unburnt fuel.
60.
61.
(a) 0.421 m/s away from the ejected fluid.
(b) .
Chapter 9
Problems & Exercises
1.
a)
b) It does not matter at what height you push. The torque depends on only the magnitude of the force applied and
the perpendicular distance of the force’s application from the hinges. (Children don’t have a tougher time opening a
door because they push lower than adults, they have a tougher time because they don’t push far enough from the
hinges.)
3.
23.3 N
5.
Given:
PAGE: 1616
1598
a) Since children are balancing:
So, solving for gives:
b) Since the children are not moving:
So that
6.
8.
a)
b) 0.292
10.
12.
a) 0.167, or about one-sixth of the weight is supported by the opposite shore.
b) , straight up.
14.
a) 21.6 N
b) 21.6 N
16.
350 N directly upwards
19.
25
50 N
21.
a)
b)
c) 510 N downward
23.
25.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1617
1599
a)
b) 897 N upward
26.
28.
30.
32.
(a) 25 N downward
(b) 75 N upward
33.
(a) upward
(b) downward
35.
(a) upward
(b) downward
37.
(a) 147 N downward
(b) 1680 N, 3.4 times her weight
(c) 118 J
(d) 49.0 W
39.
a)
b) The seesaw is 3.0 m long, and hence, there is only 1.50 m of board on the other side of the pivot. The second
child is off the board.
c) The position of the first child must be shortened, i.e. brought closer to the pivot.
Chapter 10
Problems & Exercises
1.
3.
(a)
(b)
PAGE: 1618
1600
5.
(a)
(b) 1.0 rev
7.
(a) 45.7 s
(b) 116 rev
9.
a)
b) 450 rad/s
c) 21.0 m/s
10.
(a) 0.338 s
(b) 0.0403 rev
(c) 0.313 s
12.
14.
(a)
(b)
(c)
16.
or
18.
19.
(a) 2.0 ms
(b) The time interval is too short.
(c) The moment of inertia is much too small, by one to two orders of magnitude. A torque of is
reasonable.
20.
(a) 17,500 rpm
(b) This angular velocity is very high for a disk of this size and mass. The radial acceleration at the edge of the disk is
> 50,000 gs.
(c) Flywheel mass and radius should both be much greater, allowing for a lower spin rate (angular velocity).
21.
(a) 185 J
(b) 0.0785 rev
(c)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1619
1601
23.
(a)
(b)
25.
27.
(a)
(b)
29.
(a)
(b)
34.
(a) 1.49 kJ
(b)
36.
(a)
(b)
The angular momentum of the Earth in its orbit around the Sun is times larger than the angular
momentum of the Earth around its axis.
38.
40.
25.3 rpm
43.
(a)
(b)
(c)
45.
(a) 3.13 rad/s
(b) Initial KE = 438 J, final KE = 438 J
47.
(a) 1.70 rad/s
(b) Initial KE = 22.5 J, final KE = 2.04 J
(c)
48.
(a)
(b)
(c)
PAGE: 1620
1602
Chapter 11
Problems & Exercises
1.
3.
(a) 2.58 g
(b) The volume of your body increases by the volume of air you inhale. The average density of your body decreases
when you take a deep breath, because the density of air is substantially smaller than the average density of the body
before you took the deep breath.
4.
6.
(a) 0.163 m
(b) Equivalent to 19.4 gallons, which is reasonable
8.
9.
10.
(a)
(b)
11.
; or
13.
14.
0.760 m
16.
18.
(a) 20.5 mm Hg
(b) The range of pressures in the eye is 12–24 mm Hg, so the result in part (a) is within that range
20.
22.
24.0 N
24.
; or 251 atm
26.
extra force
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1621
1603
28.
(a)
Now, using equation:
Finally,
In other words, the work output equals the work input.
(b) If the system is not moving, friction would not play a role. With friction, we know there are losses, so that
; therefore, the work output is less than the work input. In other words, with friction, you need to
push harder on the input piston than was calculated for the nonfriction case.
29.
Balloon:
Jar:
31.
4.08 m
33.
35.
36.
38.
40.
(a) 41.4 g
(b)
(c)
42.
(a) 39.5 g
(b)
(c)
It is ethyl alcohol.
44.
8.21 N
PAGE: 1622
1604
46.
(a)
(b)
She indeed floats more in seawater.
48.
(a)
(b)
(c) Yes, the cork will float because
50.
The difference is
52.
where = density of fluid. Therefore,
where is the weight of the fluid displaced.
54.
56.
58.
(a)
(b)
60.
Based on the values in table, the fluid is probably glycerin.
62.
Alcohol forms the most stable bubble, since the absolute pressure inside is closest to atmospheric pressure.
64.
This is near the value of for most organic liquids.
66.
The ratio is negative because water is raised whereas mercury is lowered.
68.
479 N
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1623
1605
70.
1.96 N
71.
73.
(a)
(b) , which is sufficient to trigger micturition reflex
75.
(a) 13.6 m water
(b) 76.5 cm water
77.
(a)
(b)
79.
(a) 2.97 cm
(b)
(c) Work is done by the surface tension force through an effective distance to raise the column of water.
81.
(a)
(b)
(c)
83.
(a)
(b)
(c) 283 N
85.
(a) 867 N
(b) This is too much force to exert with a hand pump.
(c) The assumed radius of the pump is too large; it would be nearly two inches in diameter—too large for a pump or
even a master cylinder. The pressure is reasonable for bicycle tires.
Chapter 12
Problems & Exercises
1.
3.
27 cm/s
5.
(a) 0.75 m/s
(b) 0.13 m/s
7.
PAGE: 1624
1606
(a)
(b)
9.
(a) 22 h
(b) 0.016 s
11.
(a) 12.6 m/s
(b)
(c) No, independent of density.
13.
(a) 0.402 L/s
(b) 0.584 cm
15.
(a)
(b) 0.890 cm
17.
19.
184 mm Hg
21.
23.
(a)
(b) 163 m
25.
(a)
(b) 1.4
27.
1.26 W
29.
(a)
(b)
31.
33.
35.
0.316
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1625
1607
37.
(a) 1.52
(b) Turbulence will decrease the flow rate of the blood, which would require an even larger increase in the pressure
difference, leading to higher blood pressure.
39.
41.
or
Olive oil.
43.
(a)
(b)
(c)10.6 cm
45.
1.59
47.
(gauge pressure)
51.
53.
(a) nozzle: , not laminar
(b) hose: , not laminar.
55.
2.54 << 2000, laminar.
57.
1.02 m/s
59.
(a)
(b)
61.
(a) 23.7 atm or
(b) The pressure is much too high.
(c) The assumed flow rate is very high for a garden hose.
(d) > > 3000, turbulent, contrary to the assumption of laminar flow when using this equation.
62.
64.
66.
PAGE: 1626
1608
0.391 s
Chapter 13
Problems & Exercises
1.
3.
and
5.
7.
(a)
(b)
9.
169.98 m
11.
13.
Because the area gets smaller, the price of the land DECREASES by
15.
17.
(a) 9.35 mL
(b) 7.56 mL
19.
0.832 mm
21.
We know how the length changes with temperature: . Also we know that the volume of a cube is
related to its length by , so the final volume is then . Substituting for
gives
Now, because is small, we can use the binomial expansion:
So writing the length terms in terms of volumes gives and so
22.
1.62 atm
24.
(a) 0.136 atm
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1627
1609
(b) 0.135 atm. The difference between this value and the value from part (a) is negligible.
26.
(a)
(b)
(c)
28.
30.
(a)
(b)
32.
34.
(a)
(b)
(c) 2.16 K
(d) No. The final temperature needed is much too low to be easily achieved for a large object.
36.
41 km
38.
(a)
(b)
(c)
39.
41.
(a)
(b)
43.
45.
47.
49.
51.
(a)
PAGE: 1628
1610
(b) 0.97 atm
53.
55.
78.3%
57.
(a)
(b)
59.
(a)
(b) ; the two values are nearly identical.
61.
82.3%
63.
65.
67.
. The buoyant force supports nearly the exact same amount of force on the copper block in both
′
circumstances.
69.
(a)
(b) It’s unreasonably large.
(c) At high pressures such as these, the ideal gas law can no longer be applied. As a result, unreasonable answers
come up when it is used.
71.
(a)
(b) The velocity is too high—it’s greater than the speed of light.
(c) The assumption that hydrogen inside a supernova behaves as an idea gas is responsible, because of the great
temperature and density in the core of a star. Furthermore, when a velocity greater than the speed of light is
obtained, classical physics must be replaced by relativity, a subject not yet covered.
Chapter 14
Problems & Exercises
1.
3.
5.
7.
10.8
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1629
1611
9.
617 W
11.
35.9 kcal
13.
(a) 591 kcal
(b)
15.
13.5 W
17.
(a) 148 kcal
(b) 0.418 s, 3.34 s, 4.19 s, 22.6 s, 0.456 s
19.
33.0 g
20.
(a) 9.67 L
(b) Crude oil is less dense than water, so it floats on top of the water, thereby exposing it to the oxygen in the air,
which it uses to burn. Also, if the water is under the oil, it is less efficient in absorbing the heat generated by the oil.
22.
a) 319 kcal
b)
24.
26.
4.38 kg
28.
(a)
(b)
(c)
30.
(a) W
(b) One
32.
84.0 W
34.
2.59 kg
36.
(a) 39.7 W
(b) 820 kcal
38.
35 to 1, window to wall
PAGE: 1630
1612
40.
42.
(a) 83 W
(b) 24 times that of a double pane window.
44.
20.0 W, 17.2% of 2400 kcal per day
45.
10 m/s
47.
49.
1.48 kg
51.
53.
(a) 97.2 J
(b) 29.2 W
(c) 9.49 W
(d) The total rate of heat loss would be . While sleeping, our body consumes 83 W of
power, while sitting it consumes 120 to 210 W. Therefore, the total rate of heat loss from breathing will not be a
major form of heat loss for this person.
55.
Note that the negative answer implies heat loss to the surroundings.
57.
59.
61.
(a) 1.31%
(b) 20.5%
63.
(a)
(b) 4.2 cm
65.
(a)
(b) A pure white object reflects more of the radiant energy that hits it, so a white tent would prevent more of the
sunlight from heating up the inside of the tent, and the white tunic would prevent that heat which entered the tent
from heating the rider. Therefore, with a white tent, the temperature would be lower than , and the rate of
radiant heat transferred to the rider would be less than 20.0 W.
67.
(a)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1631
1613
(b)
(c) When a large meteor hits the ocean, it causes great tidal waves, dissipating large amount of its energy in the form
of kinetic energy of the water.
69.
(a)
(b) This is equivalent to 12 million cubic feet of air per second. That is tremendous. This is too large to be dissipated
by heating the air by only . Many of these cooling towers use the circulation of cooler air over warmer water to
increase the rate of evaporation. This would allow much smaller amounts of air necessary to remove such a large
amount of heat because evaporation removes larger quantities of heat than was considered in part (a).
71.
20.9 min
73.
(a) 3.96×10-2g
(b) 96.2 J
(c) 16.0 W
75.
(a) 1.102
(b)
(c) 12.6 J. This will not cause a significant cooling of the air because it is much less than the energy found in part (b),
which is the energy required to warm the air from to .
76.
(a)
(b) Any temperature increase greater than about would be unreasonably large. In this case the final
temperature of the person would rise to .
(c) The assumption of heat retention is unreasonable.
78.
(a) 1.46 kW
(b) Very high power loss through a window. An electric heater of this power can keep an entire room warm.
(c) The surface temperatures of the window do not differ by as great an amount as assumed. The inner surface will
be warmer, and the outer surface will be cooler.
Chapter 15
Problems & Exercises
1.
3.
×
5.
(a) , or
(b) 5.00%
7.
(a) 122 W
PAGE: 1632
1614
(b)
(c) Work done by the motor is ;thus the motor produces 7.67 times the work done by the man
9.
(a) 492 kJ
(b) This amount of heat is consistent with the fact that you warm quickly when exercising. Since the body is
inefficient, the excess heat produced must be dissipated through sweating, breathing, etc.
10.
12.
(a)
(b) . Yes, the answer is the same.
14.
16.
is not equal to the difference between the heat input and the heat output.
20.
(a)
(b) 54.1%
22.
(a)
(b)
24.
(a)
(b) 0.667 barrels
26.
(a) , which is 3.32% of .
(b) , where the negative sign indicates a reduction in heat transfer to the environment.
28.
30.
(a)
(b)
(c)Yes, since automobiles engines cannot get too hot without overheating, their efficiency is limited.
32.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1633
1615
∴
(d)
34.
The heat transfer to the cold reservoir is , so the efficiency is
. The Carnot efficiency is . The actual
efficiency is 96% of the Carnot efficiency, which is much higher than the best-ever achieved of about 70%, so her
scheme is likely to be fraudulent.
36.
(a)
(b) The temperature is too cold for the output of a steam engine (the local environment). It is below the freezing
point of water.
(c) The assumed efficiency is too high.
37.
4.82
39.
0.311
41.
(a) 4.61
(b)
(c) To transfer , heat pump costs $1.00, natural gas costs $1.34.
43.
45.
(a)
(b) 40 cents
(c) This cost seems quite realistic; it says that running an air conditioner all day would cost $9.59 (if it ran
continuously).
47.
(a)
(b) In order to gain more energy, we must generate it from things within the house, like a heat pump, human bodies,
and other appliances. As you know, we use a lot of energy to keep our houses warm in the winter because of the loss
of heat to the outside.
49.
51.
(a)
(b)
53.
199 J/K
PAGE: 1634
1616
55.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
57.
It should happen twice in every or once in every
59.
(a)
(b) 24%
61.
(a) ×
(b) 5.6 times more likely
(c) If you were betting on two heads and 8 tails, the odds of breaking even are 252 to 45, so on average you would
break even. So, no, you wouldn’t bet on odds of 252 to 45.
63.
(b) 7
(c) 64
(d) 9.38%
(e) 3.33 times more likely (20 to 6)
Chapter 16
Problems & Exercises
1.
(a)
(b)
(c)
3.
(a) 889 N/m
(b) 133 N
5.
(a)
(b) Yes
7.
16.7 ms
8.
9.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1635
1617
400 Hz
10.
12,500 Hz
11.
1.50 kHz
12.
(a) 93.8 m/s
(b)
13.
15.
0.389 kg
18.
94.7 kg
21.
1.94 s
22.
6.21 cm
24.
2.01 s
26.
2.23 Hz
28.
(a) 2.99541 s
(b) Since the period is related to the square root of the acceleration of gravity, when the acceleration changes by 1%
the period changes by so it is necessary to have at least 4 digits after the decimal to see the
changes.
30.
(a) Period increases by a factor of 1.41 ( )
(b) Period decreases to 97.5% of old period
32.
Slow by a factor of 2.45
34.
length must increase by 0.0116%.
35.
(a)
(b) 50.2 cm
(c) 1.40 Hz, 71.0 cm
36.
(a)
(b)
PAGE: 1636
1618
37.
a). 0.266 m/s
b). 3.00 J
39.
42.
384 J
44.
(a). 0.123 m
(b). −0.600 J
(c). 0.300 J. The rest of the energy may go into heat caused by friction and other damping forces.
46.
(a)
(b) s
47.
49.
51.
53.
55.
57.
59.
462 Hz,
4 Hz
61.
(a) 3.33 m/s
(b) 1.25 Hz
63.
0.225 W
65.
7.07
67.
16.0 d
68.
2.50 kW
70.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1637
1619
Chapter 17
Problems & Exercises
1.
0.288 m
3.
332 m/s
5.
7.
0.223
9.
(a) 7.70 m
(b) This means that sonar is good for spotting and locating large objects, but it isn’t able to resolve smaller objects,
or detect the detailed shapes of objects. Objects like ships or large pieces of airplanes can be found by sonar, while
smaller pieces must be found by other means.
11.
(a) 18.0 ms, 17.1 ms
(b) 5.00%
(c) This uncertainty could definitely cause difficulties for the bat, if it didn’t continue to use sound as it closed in on
its prey. A 5% uncertainty could be the difference between catching the prey around the neck or around the chest,
which means that it could miss grabbing its prey.
12.
14.
16.
106 dB
18.
(a) 93 dB
(b) 83 dB
20.
(a) 50.1
(b) or
22.
70.0 dB
24.
100
26.
28.
28.2 dB
30.
PAGE: 1638
1620
(a) 878 Hz
(b) 735 Hz
32.
34.
(a) 12.9 m/s
(b) 193 Hz
36.
First eagle hears
Second eagle hears
38.
0.7 Hz
40.
0.3 Hz, 0.2 Hz, 0.5 Hz
42.
(a) 256 Hz
(b) 512 Hz
44.
180 Hz, 270 Hz, 360 Hz
46.
1.56 m
48.
(a) 0.334 m
(b) 259 Hz
50.
3.39 to 4.90 kHz
52.
(a) 367 Hz
(b) 1.07 kHz
54.
(a)
(b)
55.
57.
498.5 or 501.5 Hz
59.
82 dB
61.
approximately 48, 9, 0, –7, and 20 dB, respectively
63.
(a) 23 dB
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1639
1621
(b) 70 dB
65.
Five factors of 10
67.
(a)
(b)
69.
2.5
71.
1.26
72.
170 dB
74.
103 dB
76.
(a) 1.00
(b) 0.823
(c) Gel is used to facilitate the transmission of the ultrasound between the transducer and the patient’s body.
78.
(a)
(b) Effective penetration depth = 3.85 cm, which is enough to examine the eye.
(c)
80.
(a)
(b)
82.
(a) Because the wavelength is much shorter than
the distance in question, the wavelength is not the limiting factor.
(b) 4.55 ms
84.
974 Hz
(Note: extra digits were retained in order to show the difference.)
Chapter 18
Problems & Exercises
1.
(a)
(b)
3.
-600 C
5.
PAGE: 1640
1622
7.
9.
11.
(a) 0.263 N
(b) If the charges are distributed over some area, there will be a concentration of charge along the side closest to
the oppositely charged object. This effect will increase the net force.
13.
The separation decreased by a factor of 5.
17.
18.
(a) 3.2
(b) If the distance increases by 3.2, then the force will decrease by a factor of 10 ; if the distance decreases by 3.2,
then the force will increase by a factor of 10. Either way, the force changes by a factor of 10.
20.
(a) C
(b) This charge is approximately 1 nC, which is consistent with the magnitude of charge typical for static electricity
23.
25.
a. 0.859 m beyond negative charge on line connecting two charges
b. 0.109 m from lesser charge on line connecting two charges
28.
N
30.
(a)
(b)
32.
(a)
(b)
42.
(a)
(b) one charge of
44.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1641
1623
(a) 0.252 N to the left
(b)
46.
(a)The electric field at the center of the square will be straight up, since and are positive and and are
negative and all have the same magnitude.
(b)
48.
in the direction
50.
(a) , below the horizontal.
(b) No
52.
(a)
(b)the coulomb force is extraordinarily stronger than gravity
54.
(a)
(b)
(c)
56.
The charge is 9 times greater than .
69.
(a) The forces are balanced in thex-direction, so the net force is vertical. It is composed of the sum of the vertical
components of the Coulomb force and the gravitational force.
(b) No, it is in a metastable position. Since it cannot move horizontally, it cannot traverse any part of the track.
(c)
(d) Yes.
(e) It will reach before it will change direction.
PAGE: 1642
1624
(f) The metastable positions where there is no component in one direction are , , , and . They
number 4.
Chapter 19
Problems & Exercises
1.
42.8
4.
×
6.
(a) ×
(b) A defibrillator does not cause serious burns because the skin conducts electricity well at high voltages, like those
used in defibrillators. The gel used aids in the transfer of energy to the body, and the skin doesn’t absorb the energy,
but rather lets it pass through to the heart.
8.
(a) ×
(b) ×
9.
×
11.
(a)
(b) This voltage is very high. A 10.0 cm diameter sphere could never maintain this voltage; it would discharge.
(c) An 8.00 C charge is more charge than can reasonably be accumulated on a sphere of that size.
15.
(a)
(b)
17.
(a) No. The electric field strength between the plates is which is lower than the breakdown strength
for air ( ).
(b) 1.7 mm
19.
44.0 mV
21.
23.
(a)
(b)
24.
144 V
26.
(a) 1.80 km
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1643
1625
(b) A charge of 1 C is a very large amount of charge; a sphere of radius 1.80 km is not practical.
28.
30.
(a)
(b) 152 MeV
32.
(a)
(b)
35.
(a)
(b) This velocity is far too great. It is faster than the speed of light.
(c) The assumption that the speed of the electron is far less than that of light and that the problem does not require
a relativistic treatment produces an answer greater than the speed of light.
46.
48.
50.
20.0 kV
52.
54.
(a)
(b)
56.
(a) 14.2 kV
(b) The voltage is unreasonably large, more than 100 times the breakdown voltage of nylon.
(c) The assumed charge is unreasonably large and cannot be stored in a capacitor of these dimensions.
57.
59.
in series combination, in parallel combination
60.
62.
(a)
(b) You cannot have a negative value of capacitance.
(c) The assumption that the capacitors were hooked up in parallel, rather than in series, was incorrect. A parallel
connection always produces a greater capacitance, while here a smaller capacitance was assumed. This could
happen only if the capacitors are connected in series.
PAGE: 1644
1626
63.
(a)
(b)
64.
(a) 3.16 kV
(b) 25.3 mC
66.
(a) ,
(b) ,
67.
(a)
(b)
(c)
70.
(a)
(b) Such a capacitor would be too large to carry with a truck. The size of the capacitor would be enormous.
(c) It is unreasonable to assume that a capacitor can store the amount of energy needed.
Chapter 20
Problems & Exercises
1.
0.278 mA
3.
0.250 A
5.
1.50ms
7.
(a)
(b) If a 50 times larger resistance existed, keeping the current about the same, the power would be increased by a
factor of about 50 (based on the equation ), causing much more energy to be transferred to the skin, which
could cause serious burns. The gel used reduces the resistance, and therefore reduces the power transferred to the
skin.
9.
(a) 0.120 C
(b) ×
11.
96.3 s
13.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1645
1627
15.
×
17.
×
18.
0.833 A
20.
×
22.
(a) 0.300 V
(b) 1.50 V
(c) The voltage supplied to whatever appliance is being used is reduced because the total voltage drop from the wall
to the final output of the appliance is fixed. Thus, if the voltage drop across the extension cord is large, the voltage
drop across the appliance is significantly decreased, so the power output by the appliance can be significantly
decreased, reducing the ability of the appliance to work properly.
24.
26.
×
28.
×
30.
32.
1.03
34.
0.06%
36.
38.
(a) (total)
(b) 3.0% decrease
40.
×
44.
(a) 1.50 W
(b) 7.50 W
46.
48.
PAGE: 1646
1628
50.
$438/y
52.
$6.25
54.
1.58 h
56.
$3.94 billion/year
58.
25.5 W
60.
(a) ×
(b) 769 kg
62.
45.0 s
64.
(a) 343 A
(b) ×
(c) ×
66.
(a)
(b)
69.
(a)
(b)
(c) The transmission lines dissipate more power than they are supposed to transmit.
(d) A voltage of 480 V is unreasonably low for a transmission voltage. Long-distance transmission lines are kept at
much higher voltages (often hundreds of kilovolts) to reduce power losses.
73.
480 V
75.
2.50 ms
77.
(a) 4.00 kA
(b) 16.0 MW
(c) 16.0%
79.
2.40 kW
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1647
1629
81.
(a) 4.0
(b) 0.50
(c) 4.0
83.
(a) 1.39 ms
(b) 4.17 ms
(c) 8.33 ms
85.
(a) 194 kW
(b) 880 A
87.
(a) 0.400 mA, no effect
(b) 26.7 mA, muscular contraction for duration of the shock (can't let go)
89.
×
91.
(a)
(b) 14.4 kW
93.
Temperature increases . It is very likely to be damaging.
95.
80 beats/minute
97.
(a)
(b) , so 3.28 j of energy is expended in 1 s. Since is specified in the chart to
only two significant figures, round to 3.3 j.
(c) Since the energy dissipation is directly proportional to the resistivity, the increase of 0.01% in energy dissipation
is when the resistivity increases 1%. Or, . .
Chapter 21
Problems & Exercises
1.
(a)
(b)
3.
(a)
(b)
PAGE: 1648
1630
5.
7.
(a) 0.74 A
(b) 0.742 A
9.
(a) 60.8 W
(b) 3.18 kW
11.
(a)
≈
(b) ,
so that
≈
13.
(a)
(b) Resistance cannot be negative.
(c) Series resistance is said to be less than one of the resistors, but it must be greater than any of the resistors.
14.
2.00 V
16.
2.9994 V
18.
21.
(a) 0.658 A
(b) 0.997 W
(c) 0.997 W; yes
23.
(a) 200 A
(b) 10.0 V
(c) 2.00 kW
(d)
25.
(a)
(b) No, there is only one independent equation, so only can be found.
29.
(a) –0.120 V
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1649
1631
(b) ×
(c) Negative terminal voltage; negative load resistance.
(d) The assumption that such a cell could provide 8.50 A is inconsistent with its internal resistance.
31.
35.
37.
39.
(a)
(b)
(c)
41.
(a) No, you would get inconsistent equations to solve.
(b) . The assumed currents violate the junction rule.
42.
44.
46.
×
48.
(a)
(b)
50.
(a) 1.58 mA
(b) 1.5848 V (need four digits to see the difference)
(c) 0.99990 (need five digits to see the difference from unity)
52.
54.
(a)
(b)
(c) 0.9980, or a percent decrease
(d) 1.002, or a percent increase
(e) Not significant.
56.
(a)
PAGE: 1650
1632
(b) You can’t have negative resistance.
(c) It is unreasonable that is greater than (seeFigure 21.30). You cannot achieve a full-scale deflection using
a current less than the sensitivity of the galvanometer.
57.
24.0 V
59.
61.
(a) 2.00 V
(b)
62.
63.
65.
(a)
(b) 2.00 s
67.
86.5%
69.
(a)
(b) 30.0 ms
71.
(a) 20.0 s
(b) 120 s
(c) 16.0 ms
73.
74.
×
76.
(a) 4.99 s
(b)
(c)
(d) No
80.
(a)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1651
1633
(b)
(c)
(d) In the parallel case current passes through each branch, so more current is passed through the resistor system.
In the series, the higher resistance of the circuit allows less current to flow. is proportional to the current
when the voltage does not change.
(e) The parallel combination delivers more energy in a given time period.
Chapter 22
Problems & Exercises
1.
(a) Left (West)
(b) Into the page
(c) Up (North)
(d) No force
(e) Right (East)
(f) Down (South)
3.
(a) East (right)
(b) Into page
(c) South (down)
5.
(a) Into page
(b) West (left)
(c) Out of page
7.
perpendicular to both the magnetic field lines and the velocity
9.
(a)
(b) This is slightly less then the magnetic field strength of at the surface of the Earth, so it is consistent.
11.
(a) (taking the Earth’s field to be )
(b) Less than typical static, therefore difficult
12.
4.27 m
14.
PAGE: 1652
1634
(a) 0.261 T
(b) This strength is definitely obtainable with today’s technology. Magnetic field strengths of 0.500 T are obtainable
with permanent magnets.
16.
18.
(a) 3.00 kV/m
(b) 30.0 V
20.
0.173 m
22.
24.
(a) 1.18 × 103m/s
(b) Once established, the Hall emf pushes charges one direction and the magnetic force acts in the opposite
direction resulting in no net force on the charges. Therefore, no current flows in the direction of the Hall emf. This is
the same as in a current-carrying conductor—current does not flow in the direction of the Hall emf.
26.
11.3 mV
28.
30.
2.00 T
31.
(a) west (left)
(b) into page
(c) north (up)
(d) no force
(e) east (right)
(f) south (down)
33.
(a) into page
(b) west (left)
(c) out of page
35.
(a) 2.50 N
(b) This is about half a pound of force per 100 m of wire, which is much less than the weight of the wire itself.
Therefore, it does not cause any special concerns.
37.
1.80 T
39.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1653
1635
(a)
(b) 4.80 N
41.
(a) decreases by 5.00% if B decreases by 5.00%
(b) 5.26% increase
43.
10.0 A
45.
.
47.
49.
(a) west
(b) This is not a very significant torque, so practical use would be limited. Also, the current would need to be
alternated to make the loop rotate (otherwise it would oscillate).
50.
(a) 8.53 N, repulsive
(b) This force is repulsive and therefore there is never a risk that the two wires will touch and short circuit.
52.
400 A in the opposite direction
54.
(a)
(b)
(c) Repulsive
(d) No, these are very small forces
56.
(a) Top wire: s, to left of up
(b) Lower left wire: , down from right
(c) Lower right wire: , down from left
58.
(a) right-into page, left-out of page
(b) right-out of page, left-into page
(c) right-out of page, left-into page
60.
(a) clockwise
(b) clockwise as seen from the left
(c) clockwise as seen from the right
61.
63.
PAGE: 1654
1636
(a)
(b) Zero
(c) If the wires are not paired, the field is about 10 times stronger than Earth’s magnetic field and so could severely
disrupt the use of a compass.
65.
39.8 A
67.
(a)
(b) 0.314 T
69.
,
71.
10.0 A
73.
(a) upward
(b)
75.
60.2 cm
77.
(a)
(b) Not a significant fraction of an atmosphere
79.
81.
18.3 MHz
83.
(a) Straight up
(b)
(c)
(d)2.47 Ω/m, 49.4 V/m
85.
(a) 571 C
(b) Impossible to have such a large separated charge on such a small object.
(c) The 1.00-N force is much too great to be realistic in the Earth’s field.
87.
(a)
(b) The speed is too high to be practical 1% speed of light
(c) The assumption that you could reasonably generate such a voltage with a single wire in the Earth’s field is
unreasonable
89.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1655
1637
(a) 25.0 kA
(b) This current is unreasonably high. It implies a total power delivery in the line of 50.0x10^9 W, which is much too
high for standard transmission lines.
(c)100 meters is a long distance to obtain the required field strength. Also coaxial cables are used for transmission
lines so that there is virtually no field for DC power lines, because of cancellation from opposing currents. The
surveyor’s concerns are not a problem for his magnetic field measurements.
92.
(a)
Since for the first electron.
For the second and third electrons, .
So, .
(b) The first electron moves in a straight line. The other two electrons take a circular path.
(c) The first electron will never return to the origin. The other two will return.
Chapter 23
Problems & Exercises
1.
Zero
3.
(a) CCW
(b) CW
(c) No current induced
5.
(a) 1 CCW, 2 CCW, 3 CW
(b) 1, 2, and 3 no current induced
(c) 1 CW, 2 CW, 3 CCW
9.
(a) 3.04 mV
(b) As a lower limit on the ring, estimate R = 1.00 mΩ. The heat transferred will be 2.31 mJ. This is not a significant
amount of heat.
11.
0.157 V
13.
proportional to
17.
(a) 0.630 V
(b) No, this is a very small emf.
19.
2.22 m/s
PAGE: 1656
1638
25.
(a) 10.0 N
(b)
(c) 0.36 m/s
(d) For a week-long mission (168 hours), the change in velocity will be 60 m/s, or approximately 1%. In general, a
decrease in velocity would cause the orbit to start spiraling inward because the velocity would no longer be
sufficient to keep the circular orbit. The long-term consequences are that the shuttle would require a little more fuel
to maintain the desired speed, otherwise the orbit would spiral slightly inward.
28.
474 V
30.
0.247 V
32.
(a) 50
(b) yes
34.
(a) 0.477 T
(b) This field strength is small enough that it can be obtained using either a permanent magnet or an electromagnet.
36.
(a) 5.89 V
(b) At t=0
(c) 0.393 s
(d) 0.785 s
38.
(a)
(b) This angular velocity is unreasonably high, higher than can be obtained for any mechanical system.
(c) The assumption that a voltage as great as 12.0 kV could be obtained is unreasonable.
39.
(a)
(b) 1.67 A
41.
72.0 V
43.
44.
(a) 30.0
(b)
46.
(a) 20.0 mA
(b) 2.40 W
(c) Yes, this amount of power is quite reasonable for a small appliance.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1657
1639
48.
(a) 0.063 A
(b) Greater input current needed.
50.
(a) 2.2
(b) 0.45
(c) 0.20, or 20.0%
52.
(a) 335 MV
(b) way too high, well beyond the breakdown voltage of air over reasonable distances
(c) input voltage is too high
54.
(a) 15.0 V
(b) 75.0 A
(c) yes
55.
1.80 mH
57.
3.60 V
61.
(a) 31.3 kV
(b) 125 kJ
(c) 1.56 MW
(d) No, it is not surprising since this power is very high.
63.
(a) 1.39 mH
(b) 3.33 V
(c) Zero
65.
60.0 mH
67.
(a) 200 H
(b)
69.
500 H
71.
73.
to 0.100 s
75.
PAGE: 1658
1640
95.0%
77.
(a) 24.6 ms
(b) 26.7 ms
(c) 9% difference, which is greater than the inherent uncertainty in the given parameters.
79.
531 Hz
81.
1.33 nF
83.
(a) 2.55 A
(b) 1.53 mA
85.
87.
(a) 21.2 mH
(b)
89.
(a) 3.18 mF
(b)
92.
(a) at 60.0 Hz, at 10.0 kHz
(b) At 60 Hz, with a capacitor, , over 13 times as high as without the capacitor. The capacitor makes a large
difference at low frequencies. At 10 kHz, with a capacitor , about the same as without the capacitor. The
capacitor has a smaller effect at high frequencies.
94.
(a) at 60.0 Hz, at 10.0 kHz
(b) These values are close to those obtained inExample 23.12because at low frequency the capacitor dominates
and at high frequency the inductor dominates. So in both cases the resistor makes little contribution to the total
impedance.
96.
9.30 nF to 101 nF
98.
3.17 pF
100.
(a)
(b) 1.66 pF
102.
(a)
(b)
(c) 31.9 mA at 500 Hz, 312 mA at 7.50 kHz
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1659
1641
(d) 82.2 kHz
(e) 0.408 A
104.
(a) 0.159
(b)
(c) 26.4 W
(d) 166 W
106.
16.0 W
107.
(a)
(b)
(c) The average emf is 0 since the loops are made by a wire that crosses, so the voltage from each loop cancels the
emf from the other.
(d) No.
Chapter 24
Problems & Exercises
3.
150 kV/m
6.
(a) 33.3 cm (900 MHz) 11.7 cm (2560 MHz)
(b) The microwave oven with the smaller wavelength would produce smaller hot spots in foods, corresponding to
the one with the frequency 2560 MHz.
8.
26.96 MHz
10.
Hz
12.
×
×
×
14.
0.600 m
16.
×
(a) ×
×
(b) X-rays
19.
(a)
(b)
PAGE: 1660
1642
21.
(a) 1.50 × 106Hz, AM band
(b) The resonance of currents on an antenna that is 1/4 their wavelength is analogous to the fundamental resonant
mode of an air column closed at one end, since the tube also has a length equal to 1/4 the wavelength of the
fundamental oscillation.
23.
(a)
(b) The shortest wavelength of visible light is 380 nm, so that
In other words, the UV radiation is 97% more accurate than the shortest wavelength of visible light, or almost twice
as accurate!
25.
27.
(a)
(b)
(c) 66.7 ns
29.
(a) ×
(b) 88%
(c)
30.
× ×
32.
×
(a)
×
×
(b)
×
×
× ×
(c)
×
34.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1661
1643
(a) 89.2 cm
(b) 27.4 V/m
36.
(a) 333 T
(b) ×
(c) 13.3 kJ
38.
(a)
(b) ∝ ∝ ∝
40.
13.5 pF
42.
(a)
(b) 1.75 kV/m
(c)
(d) 2 min 19 s
44.
(a) ×
(b)
(c)
46.
(a)
(b)
(c)
48.
(a)
(b) Much too great for an oven.
(c) The assumed magnetic field is unreasonably large.
50.
(a)
(b) L is much too small.
(c) The wavelength is unreasonably small.
53.
(a)
(b)Ewould increase.
(c) It would be by 1/c.
PAGE: 1662
1644
Chapter 25
Problems & Exercises
1.
Top from floor, bottom from floor. Height of mirror is , or precisely one-half the height of
the person.
5.
in water
in glycerine
7.
, polystyrene
9.
11.
13.
, fused quartz
17.
(a) 0.898
(b) Can’t have since this would imply a speed greater than .
(c) Refracted angle is too big relative to the angle of incidence.
19.
(a)
(b) Speed of light too slow, since index is much greater than that of diamond.
(c) Angle of refraction is unreasonable relative to the angle of incidence.
22.
24.
26.
1.50, benzene
29.
31.
(a)
(b)
33.
35.
37.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1663
1645
39.
41.
(a) 3.43 m
(b) 0.800 by 1.20 m
42.
(a) (on the object side of the lens).
(b)
(c) 5.00 cm
43.
44.4 cm
45.
(a) 6.60 cm
(b) –0.500
47.
(a)
(b)
(c) Much greater
49.
(a) +6.67
(b) +20.0
(c) The magnification increases without limit (to infinity) as the object distance increases to the limit of the focal
distance.
51.
53.
+0.667 m
55.
(a)
(b)
57.
+0.360 m (concave)
59.
(a) +0.111
(b) -0.334 cm (behind “mirror”)
(c) 0.752cm
61.
63.
PAGE: 1664
1646
65.
(a)
(b) No.
(c) No.
(d) Yes.
Chapter 26
Problems & Exercises
1.
3.
(a)
(b) The size of the rods and the cones is smaller than the image height, so we can distinguish letters on a page.
5.
(a)
(b)
(c)
6.
2.00 m
8.
(a)
(b) The person was nearsighted because the patient was myopic and the power was reduced.
10.
0.143 m
12.
1.00 m
14.
20.0 cm
16.
18.
25.0 cm
20.
22.
30.8 cm
24.
26.
(a) 4.00
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1665
1647
(b) 1600
28.
(a) 0.501 cm
(b) Eyepiece should be 204 cm behind the objective lens.
30.
(a) +18.3 cm (on the eyepiece side of the objective lens)
(b) -60.0
(c) -11.3 cm (on the objective side of the eyepiece)
(d) +6.67
(e) -400
33.
35.
37.
39.
(a)
(b) Yes, this thickness implies that the shape of the cornea can be very finely controlled, producing normal distant
vision in more than 90% of patients.
40.
(a)
(b) It increased.
(c) The magnification should decrease.
(d) In both cases the image is inverted.
PAGE: 1666
1648
Chapter 27
Problems & Exercises
1.
3.
1.49, Polystyrene
5.
0.877 glass to water
6.
8.
10.
600 nm
12.
14.
1200 nm (not visible)
16.
(a) 760 nm
(b) 1520 nm
18.
For small angles .
For two adjacent fringes we have,
and
Subtracting these equations gives
20.
450 nm
21.
23.
25.
707 nm
27.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1667
1649
(a)
(b)
(c) Decreasing the number of lines per centimeter by a factor of x means that the angle for the x‐order maximum is
the same as the original angle for the first-order maximum.
29.
589.1 nm and 589.6 nm
31.
33.
35.
37.
(a) The longest wavelength is 333.3 nm, which is not visible.
(b) 333 nm (UV)
(c)
39.
41.
(a) 42.3 nm
(b) Not a visible wavelength
The number of slits in this diffraction grating is too large. Etching in integrated circuits can be done to a resolution of
50 nm, so slit separations of 400 nm are at the limit of what we can do today. This line spacing is too small to
produce diffraction of light.
43.
(a)
(b) No
45.
(a)
(b)
47.
750 nm
49.
(a)
(b) 12
51.
(a)
(b) 0.262 mm
(c) This distance is not easily measured by human eye, but under a microscope or magnifying glass it is quite easily
measurable.
53.
PAGE: 1668
1650
(a)
(b)
(c) No
(d) . Thus, .
55.
and
57.
(a)
(b) 326 ly
59.
61.
(a)
(b) Diameter of
63.
5.15 cm
65.
(a) Yes. Should easily be able to discern.
(b) The fact that it is just barely possible to discern that these are separate bodies indicates the severity of
atmospheric aberrations.
70.
532 nm (green)
72.
83.9 nm
74.
620 nm (orange)
76.
380 nm
78.
33.9 nm
80.
82.
The oil film will appear black, since the reflected light is not in the visible part of the spectrum.
84.
86.
88.
90.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1669
1651
92.
94.
96.
(a) 1.92, not diamond (Zircon)
(b)
98.
100.
(a) °C/s
(b) Yes, the polarizing filters get hot because they absorb some of the lost energy from the sunlight.
101.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e) No.
Chapter 28
Problems & Exercises
1.
(a) 1.0328
(b) 1.15
3.
5.
7.
9.
(a)
(b) (to five digits to show effect)
11.
(a) 0.996
(b) cannot be less than 1.
(c) Assumption that time is longer in moving ship is unreasonable.
12.
48.6 m
PAGE: 1670
1652
14.
(a) 1.387 km = 1.39 km
(b) 0.433 km
(c)
Thus, the distances in parts (a) and (b) are related when .
16.
(a) 4.303 y (to four digits to show any effect)
(b) 0.1434 y
(c)
Thus, the two times are related when .
18.
(a) 0.250
(b) must be ≥1
(c) The Earth-bound observer must measure a shorter length, so it is unreasonable to assume a longer length.
20.
(a)
(b)
22.
24.
a)
b) red
c) (negligible)
26.
28.
30.
32.
, so
34.
a)
b)
c) (all to sufficient digits to show effects)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1671
1653
35.
37.
(a) .
(b) Ratio of relativistic to classical momenta equals 1.000000005 (extra digits to show small effects)
39.
41.
(a)
(b) The small speed tells us that the mass of a proton is substantially smaller than that of even a tiny amount of
macroscopic matter!
43.
0.512 MeV
45.
47.
(a)
(b)
49.
The ratio is greater for hydrogen.
51.
208
53.
1.54
55.
(a)
(b) The rest mass energy of an electron is 0.511 MeV, so the kinetic energy is approximately 150% of the rest mass
energy. The electron should be traveling close to the speed of light.
57.
90.0 MeV
59.
(a)
(b) yes
PAGE: 1672
1654
61.
63.
65.
67.
(a) 1.00 kg
(b) This much mass would be measurable, but probably not observable just by looking because it is 0.01% of the
total mass.
69.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d) 0.32%
73.
(a)
(b)
(c) No.
(d) Yes.
Chapter 29
Problems & Exercises
1.
(a) 0.070 eV
(b) 14
3.
(a)
(b)
(c) No
4.
263 nm
6.
3.69 eV
8.
0.483 eV
10.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1673
1655
2.25 eV
12.
(a) 264 nm
(b) Ultraviolet
14.
16.
(a)
(b) 0.256 mW
18.
(a)
(b) Negative kinetic energy
(c) That the electrons would be knocked free.
20.
,
22.
24.
26.
(a) 0.0829 eV
(b) 121
(c) 1.24 MeV
(d)
28.
(a)
(b)
30.
(a) 2.69
(b) 0.371
32.
(a)
(b) 997 km
34.
36.
181 km
38.
PAGE: 1674
1656
(a)
(b) The wavelength of microwave photons is large, so the momentum they carry is very small.
40.
(a) 13.3 μm
(b) eV
42.
(a)
(b) 291 m/s
(c) electron , photon , ratio
44.
(a)
(b) 9.39 MeV
(c)
46.
and , so
As the mass of particle approaches zero, its velocity will approach , so that the ratio of energy to momentum in
this limit is
which is consistent with the equation for photon energy.
48.
(a)
(b) Headlights are way too bright.
(c) Force is too large.
49.
51.
53.
55.
(a)
(b)
57.
15.1 keV
59.
(a) 5.29 fm
(b)
(c) 29.4 MV
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1675
1657
61.
(a)
(b) This is thousands of times the speed of light (an impossibility).
(c) The assumption that the electron is non-relativistic is unreasonable at this wavelength.
62.
(a) 57.9 m/s
(b)
(c) FromTable 29.1, we see that typical molecular binding energies range from about 1eV to 10 eV, therefore the
result in part (b) is approximately 9 orders of magnitude smaller than typical molecular binding energies.
64.
29 nm,
290 times greater
66.
68.
70.
72.
0.395 nm
74.
(a)
(b)
(c)
76.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
78.
(a)
(b)
(c)
80.
(a)
(b) for photon, for electron, photon energy is times greater
(c) The light is easier to make because 450-nm light is blue light and therefore easy to make. Creating electrons with
of energy would not be difficult, but would require a vacuum.
81.
(a)
PAGE: 1676
1658
(b)
83.
85.
(a) 2.00 kJ
(b)
(c)
(d) yes
87.
(a)
(b)
(c) Yes, conservation of momentum applies.
(d) The photon with the longer wavelength has less momentum than the one with the shorter wavelength.
Chapter 30
Problems & Exercises
1.
3.
50 km
4.
6.
(a)
(b) It isn’t hard to make one of approximately this size. It would be harder to make it exactly .
7.
so that
, which is UV radiation.
9.
11.
0.850 eV
13.
15.
365 nm
It is in the ultraviolet.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1677
1659
17.
No overlap
365 nm
122 nm
19.
7
21.
(a) 2
(b) 54.4 eV
23.
so that From the equation we can substitute for the
velocity, giving: so that where .
25.
(a)
(b) 50.0 keV
(c) The photon energy is simply the applied voltage times the electron charge, so the value of the voltage in volts is
the same as the value of the energy in electron volts.
27.
(a) ,
(b)
29.
(a) 8.00 keV
(b) 9.48 keV
30.
(a) 1.96 eV
(b)
(c) 60.0 nm
32.
693 nm
34.
(a) 590 nm
(b)
35.
are possible since and .
37.
are possible.
39.
(a)
(b)
PAGE: 1678
1660
41.
(a)
(b)
(c)
43.
44.
(a) 32. (b) and 14 in , for a total of 32.
46.
(a) 2
(b)
48.
(b) is violated,
(c) cannot have 3 electrons in subshell since
(d) cannot have 7 electrons in subshell since
50.
(a) The number of different values of is for each and one for Also an
overall factor of 2 since each can have equal to either or .
(b) for each value of , you get
to see
that the expression in the box is imagine taking from the last term and adding it to first term
Now take from
penultimate term and add to the second term .
52.
The electric force on the electron is up (toward the positively charged plate). The magnetic force is down (by the
RHR).
54.
401 nm
56.
(a)
(b)
58.
, which agrees with the known value of to within the precision of the
measurement
60.
(a) 2.78 fm
(b) 0.37 of the nuclear radius.
62.
(a)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1679
1661
(b) 2.52 MW
64.
(a) 6.42 eV
(b)
(c) 0.454 eV, 14.1 times less than a single UV photon. Therefore, each photon will evaporate approximately 14
molecules of tissue. This gives the surgeon a rather precise method of removing corneal tissue from the surface of
the eye.
66.
91.18 nm to 91.22 nm
68.
(a)
(b) The voltage is extremely large compared with any practical value.
(c) The assumption of such a short wavelength by this method is unreasonable.
72.
(a)
(b)
(c) Yes.
Chapter 31
Problems & Exercises
1.
5.
7.
9.
(a)
(b)
11.
13.
15.
19.3 to 1
PAGE: 1680
1662
17.
19.
21.
23.
25.
27.
29.
(a)
(b) 0.511 MeV
(c) The two rays must travel in exactly opposite directions in order to conserve momentum, since initially there is
zero momentum if the center of mass is initially at rest.
31.
33.
35.
(a)
(b) 4.87 MeV
37.
(a)
(b) ) 0.783 MeV
39.
1.82 MeV
41.
(a) 4.274 MeV
(b)
(c) Since U-238 is a slowly decaying substance, only a very small number of nuclei decay on human timescales;
therefore, although those nuclei that decay lose a noticeable fraction of their mass, the change in the total mass of
the sample is not detectable for a macroscopic sample.
43.
(a)
(b) 2.754 MeV
44.
57,300 y
46.
(a) 0.988 Ci
(b) The half-life of is now better known.
48.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1681
1663
50.
(a) 16.0 mg
(b) 0.0114%
52.
54.
56.
2.71 y
58.
(a) 1.56 mg
(b) 11.3 Ci
60.
(a)
(b) Only part of the emitted radiation goes in the direction of the detector. Only a fraction of that causes a response
in the detector. Some of the emitted radiation (mostly particles) is observed within the source. Some is absorbed
within the source, some is absorbed by the detector, and some does not penetrate the detector.
62.
(a)
(b)
(c)
64.
(a)
(b) 6.24 kW
(c) 5.67 kW
68.
(a) 84.5 Ci
(b) An extremely large activity, many orders of magnitude greater than permitted for home use.
(c) The assumption of is unreasonably large. Other methods can detect much smaller decay rates.
69.
1.112 MeV, consistent with graph
71.
7.848 MeV, consistent with graph
73.
(a) 7.680 MeV, consistent with graph
(b) 7.520 MeV, consistent with graph. Not significantly different from value for , but sufficiently lower to allow
decay into another nuclide that is more tightly bound.
75.
(a) vs. 1.007825 u for
(b) 0.000549 u
PAGE: 1682
1664
(c)
76.
(a)
(b) The negative binding energy implies an unbound system.
(c) This assumption that it is two bound neutrons is incorrect.
78.
22.8 cm
79.
(a)
(b) 4.679 MeV
(c) 4.599 MeV
81.
a) u
(b) The greatest known atomic masses are about 260. This result found in (a) is extremely large.
(c) The assumed radius is much too large to be reasonable.
82.
(a)
(b) Negative energy implies energy input is necessary and the reaction cannot be spontaneous.
(c) Although all conversation laws are obeyed, energy must be supplied, so the assumption of spontaneous decay is
incorrect.
84.
(a)
(b) For barium:
For krypton:
To two significant figures, they are all alike.
Chapter 32
Problems & Exercises
1.
5.701 MeV
3.
5.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1683
1665
7.
(a) 6.958 MeV
(b)
8.
(a) 100 mSv
(b) 80 mSv
(c) ~30 mSv
10.
~2 Gy
12.
1.69 mm
14.
1.24 MeV
16.
18.
20.
4.43 g
22.
0.010 g
24.
95%
26.
(a) , ,
(b) , ,
(c) , ,
28.
30.
(about 200 tons)
32.
PAGE: 1684
1666
34.
36.
38.
(a) , ,
(b) , ,
(c) , ,
(d) , ,
(e) , ,
(f) , ,
40.
42.
(a)
(b) This is approximately half the lifetime of the Earth.
43.
(a) 177.1 MeV
(b) Because the gain of an external neutron yields about 6 MeV, which is the average for heavy nuclei.
(c)
45.
(a) 180.6 MeV
(b)
47.
4.81 MeV
0.753 MeV
0.211 MeV
49.
(a)
(b)
(c) 991 kg
51.
0.56 g
53.
4.781 MeV
55.
(a) Blast yields to , or 2.5 to 1, conventional to radiation enhanced.
(b) Prompt radiation yields to , or 3 to 1, radiation enhanced to conventional.
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1685
1667
57.
(a) , 4.4 kg
(b) , 2.7 kg
(c) The nuclear fuel totals only 6 kg, so it is quite reasonable that some missiles carry 10 overheads. The mass of the
fuel would only be 60 kg and therefore the mass of the 10 warheads, weighing about 10 times the nuclear fuel,
would be only 1500 lbs. If the fuel for the missiles weighs 5 times the total weight of the warheads, the missile
would weigh about 9000 lbs or 4.5 tons. This is not an unreasonable weight for a missile.
59.
61.
(a)
(b) 11.0 y
62.
(a) and
(b) and
(c) They travel in opposite directions along the same line.
(d) Yes.
Chapter 33
Problems & Exercises
1.
3.
4.
(a) to 1, weak to EM
(b) 1 to 1
6.
(a)
(b)
8.
78.0 cm
10.
12.
100 GeV
13.
67.5 MeV
15.
(a)
(b)
17.
PAGE: 1686
1668
(a)
(b)
(c)
19.
(a) 3.9 eV
(b)
21.
(a) The composition is the same as for a proton.
(b)
(c) Strong (short lifetime)
23.
a)
b)
25.
(a)
(b) , all lepton numbers are 0 before and after
(c)
27.
(a)
(b) 277.9 MeV
(c) 547.9 MeV
29.
No. is conserved. is not conserved. is conserved.
31.
(a)Yes. , , all lepton family numbers are 0 before and after, spontaneous since
mass greater before reaction.
(b)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1687
1669
33.
(a) 216
(b) There are more baryons observed because we have the 6 antiquarks and various mixtures of quarks (as for the
π-meson) as well.
35.
37.
(a)803 MeV
(b) 938.8 MeV
(c) The annihilation energy of an extra electron is included in the total energy.
39.
41.
a)The antiproton
b)
43.
(a)
(b)
45.
47.
(a) 33.9 MeV
(b) Muon antineutrino 29.8 MeV, muon 4.1 MeV (kinetic energy)
49.
(a)
(b)
(c)
53.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d) The proton has a positive charge, and the antiproton has a negative charge.
Chapter 34
Problems & Exercises
1.
PAGE: 1688
1670
3.
(a)
(b)
(c)
5.
0.30 Gly
7.
(a)
(b)
9.
11.
(an overestimate, since some of the light from Andromeda is blocked by gas and dust within that galaxy)
13.
(a)
(b)
15.
(a)
(b)
17.
960 rev/s
19.
(many digits are used to show the difference between )
22.
23.6 km
24.
(a)
(b)
26.
(a)
(b) 10 times greater
27.
29.
31.
32.
(a)
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1689
1671
(b)
(c) The galaxies are separating mostly due to the expansion of space.
(d) Light from the third galaxy would have a red shift when detected in either of the other galaxies.
PAGE: 1690
1672
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1691
Index 1673
INDEX
Symbols atomic excitation 1343 bridge devices 933
(peak) emf 1019 atomic mass 1388 Brownian motion 1320
atomic number 1363,1388 buoyant force 457
A
atomic spectra 1280
C
aberrations 1175
average acceleration 89
absolute pressure 453 capacitance 834,935
Average Acceleration 47
absolute zero 532 capacitive reactance 1040
Average speed 44
AC current 876 capacitor 833,934
Average velocity 43
AC voltage 876 capillary action 470
Avogadro’s number 547
acceleration 47,151 carbon-14 dating 1400
axions 1522
acceleration due to gravity 72 Carnot cycle 644
axis of a polarizing filter 1214
accommodation 1153 Carnot efficiency 645
Accuracy 24 B Carnot engine 644
acoustic impedance 758 B-field 960 carrier particles 182
active transport 517 back emf 1022 carrier wave 1073
activity 1402 banked curves 238 cathode-ray tubes 1322
adaptive optics 1174 barrier penetration 1411 Celsius 531
adhesive forces 464 baryon number 1480 center of gravity 364
adiabatic 636 Baryons 1480 center of mass 245
air resistance 117 basal metabolic rate 303 centrifugal force 241
alpha 1381 beat frequency 711 centrifuge 233
alpha decay 1393 becquerel 1402 centripetal acceleration 232
Alternating current 876 Bernoulli’s equation 494 centripetal force 235
ammeters 927 Bernoulli’s principle 495 change in angular velocity 393
ampere 858 beta 1381 change in entropy 654
Ampere’s law 979 beta decay 1395 change in momentum 327
amplitude 684,1067,1087 Big Bang 1506 Chaos 1524
amplitude modulation 1073 binding energy 1282,1405 characteristic time constant
Analog meters 928 binding energy per nucleon 1407 1036
Analytical methods 111 bioelectricity 886 characteristic x rays 1288
Anger camera 1426 Biot-Savart law 979 charm 1488
angular acceleration 393 birefringent 1221 chart of the nuclides 1391
angular magnification 1172 Black holes 1514 chemical energy 294
angular momentum 415 blackbodies 1279 classical physics 13
angular momentum quantum blackbody radiation 1279 Classical relativity 132
number 1358 Bohr radius 1333 coefficient of linear expansion
angular velocity 230 Boltzmann constant 545 538
antielectron 1397 boson 1478 coefficient of performance 652
antimatter 1396 bottom 1488 coefficient of volume expansion
antinode 710,745 bow wake 742 540
approximations 29 break-even 1443 coherent 1191
arc length 229 breeder reactors 1450 cohesive forces 464
Archimedes’ principle 459 breeding 1450 Colliding beams 1474
astigmatism 1159 bremsstrahlung 1288 color 1488
atom 1320 Brewster’s angle 1216 color constancy 1164
atomic de-excitation 1343 Brewster’s law 1216 commutative 107,135
PAGE: 1692
1674 Index
complexity 1523 curie 1402 diverging lens 1120
components 110 Curie temperature 957 domains 957
compound microscope 1166 current 904 Doppler effect 738
Compton effect 1293 Current sensitivity 928 Doppler shift 738
Conduction 592 cyclical process 640 Doppler-shifted ultrasound 761
conductor 780 cyclotron 1473 Double-slit interference 1331
Conductors 794 down 1483
D
confocal microscopes 1224 drag force 204
Dalton’s law of partial pressures
conservation laws 923 drift velocity 861
563
Conservation of energy 269 dynamic equilibrium 358
dark matter 1519
conservation of mechanical Dynamics 147,149,185
daughters 1392
energy 286
de Broglie wavelength 1297 E
conservation of momentum
decay 1380,1392 eddy current 1014
principle 330
decay constant 1400 efficiency 296
Conservation of total 1480
decay equation 1394,1394, Elapsed time 43
conservation of total baryon
1398 elastic collision 333,333
number 1480
decay series 1392 elastic potential energy 681
conservation of total LμLμ 1480
deceleration 48 electric and magnetic fields
conservative force 284
defibrillator 845 1086
constructive interference 708
deformation 209,678 electric charge 775
constructive interference for a
degree Celsius 531 electric current 858
diffraction grating 1196
degree Fahrenheit 532 electric field 794,1067
constructive interference for a
Density 441 Electric field lines 1065
double slit 1193
dependent variable 80 electric field strength 787
contact angle 470
derived units 16 electric fields 788
Contrast 1222
destructive interference 708 Electric generators 1017
Convection 592
destructive interference for a electric potential 819
converging (or convex) lens 1118
double slit 1193 electric power 872
conversion factor 20
destructive interference for a Electrical energy 294
Coriolis force 242
single slit 1201 electrocardiogram (ECG) 891
corner reflector 1112
dew point 564 electromagnetic force 774
correspondence principle 1278
dialysis 516 electromagnetic induction 1006
cosmic microwave background
diastolic pressure 454,474 electromagnetic waves 1063,
1508
dielectric 837 1067,1086
cosmological constant 1519
dielectric strengths 838 Electromagnetism 957
cosmological red shift 1506
diffraction 1190 electromagnets 957
Cosmology 1504
diffraction grating 1195 electromotive force 914
Coulomb force 786
Diffusion 513 Electron capture 1398
Coulomb forces 785
digital meters 928 electron capture equation 1398
Coulomb interaction 792
dipole 792 electron family number 1479
Coulomb’s law 784
Direct current 876 electron volt 822
critical angle 1108
direction 106 electron’s antineutrino 1396
Critical damping 698
direction of magnetic field lines electron’s neutrino 1398
critical density 1520
960 electrons 776
critical mass 1449
direction of polarization 1213 electrostatic equilibrium 794
critical point 560
Dispersion 1114 electrostatic force 784
Critical pressure 560
displacement 38 electrostatic precipitators 800
critical temperature 560,1525
Distance 40 Electrostatic repulsion 781
criticality 1449
Distance traveled 40 electrostatics 797
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1693
Index 1675
electroweak epoch 1511 force 149,185 Hall emf 969
electroweak theory 1490 force constant 679 harmonics 746
emf 923 force field 179,181,786 head 104
emf induced in a generator coil fossil fuels 306 head-to-tail method 104,135
1019 free charges 794 Hearing 726,751
emissivity 606 free electrons 780 heat 578
endoscope 1111 free radicals 1439 heat engine 630
energies of hydrogen-like atoms free-body diagram 149,171, heat of sublimation 591
1334 185 heat pump’s coefficient of
energy 270 free-fall 72,154 performance 650
energy stored in an inductor Frequency 683,1067 heat transfer 529
1035 frequency modulation 1073 Heisenberg uncertainty principle
energy-level diagram 1332 friction 152,198,288 1304
English units 16 full-scale deflection 928 Heisenberg’s uncertainty
entropy 653 fundamental 746 principle 1305
equipotential lines 830 fundamental frequency 710 henry 1032
escape velocity 1514 fundamental particle 1482 Higgs boson 1492
event horizon 1515 fundamental units 16 high dose 1430
external force 151 hologram 1350
G
external forces 149,185 Holography 1350
galvanometer 928
Extremely low frequency (ELF) Hooke’s law 209
gamma 1381
1073 horizontally polarized 1213
gamma camera 1426
eyepiece 1166 Hormesis 1432
Gamma decay 1398
horsepower 299
F gamma ray 1084
Hubble constant 1507
Fahrenheit 531 Gamma rays 1286
hues 1161
far point 1156 gauge bosons 1477
Human metabolism 627
Faraday cage 796 gauge pressure 453
Huygens’s principle 1188
Faraday’s law of induction 1007 gauss 962
Hydrogen spectrum wavelength
Farsightedness 1156 Geiger tube 1385
1331
fermion 1478 general relativity 1512
hydrogen-like atom 1333
ferromagnetic 956 geometric optics 1099
hydrogen-spectrum wavelengths
Feynman diagram 1471 glaucoma 475
1330
Fiber optics 1110 gluons 1472,1490
hyperopia 1156
fictitious force 241 Grand Unified Theory (GUT)
fine structure 1356 1490 I
first law of thermodynamics 624 gravitational constant 245 ideal banking 238
first postulate of special gravitational potential energy ideal gas law 545
relativity 1239 278 Ignition 1443
fission fragments 1447 Gravitational waves 1516 Image distance 1125
flat (zero curvature) universe gray (Gy) 1429 impedance 1042
1520 greenhouse effect 608 impulse 327
flavors 1483 grounded 799 Incoherent 1191
Flow rate 490 grounding 831 independent variable 80
fluid dynamics 489 GUT epoch 1511 index of refraction 1103
fluids 440 inductance 1032
H
Fluorescence 1343 induction 781,1004
Hadrons 1477
focal length 1118 inductive reactance 1039
half-life 1399
focal point 1118 inductor 1033
Hall effect 969
Food irradiation 1438 inelastic collision 336
PAGE: 1694
1676 Index
inertia 151,185 laser 1347 magnetoencephalogram (MEG)
inertial confinement 1444 Laser printers 799 986
inertial frame of reference 169, Laser vision correction 1160 magnification 1125
1239 latent heat coefficients 587 magnitude 105
inflationary scenario 1512 law 11 magnitude of kinetic friction f k f
Infrared radiation 1077 law of conservation of angular k 199
Infrared radiation (IR) 1291 momentum 419 magnitude of static friction f s f s
infrasound 751 law of conservation of charge 199
ink jet printer 800 778 magnitude of the intrinsic
Instantaneous acceleration 51 law of conservation of energy (internal) spin angular
Instantaneous speed 44 293 momentum 1360
Instantaneous velocity 44 law of inertia 151,185 mass 151,185
insulators 780 law of refraction 1106 mass number 1389
intensity 714,733,1087 Length contraction 1249 massive compact halo objects
intensity reflection coefficient Lenz’s law 1007 1522
759 leptons 1477 maximum field strength 1087
Interference microscopes 1222 linear accelerator 1475 Maxwell’s equations 979,1064
internal energy 625 linear hypothesis 1431 mechanical advantage 372
Internal kinetic energy 333,333 Linear momentum 324 mechanical energy 286,823
internal resistance 914 liquid drop model 1447 mechanical equivalent of heat
intraocular pressure 475 liter 490 578
intrinsic magnetic field 1356 longitudinal wave 706 meson 1470
intrinsic spin 1356 loop rule 923 Mesons 1480
ionizing radiation 1286,1382 Lorentz force 962 metabolic rate 303
ionosphere 795 loudness 751 metastable 1344
irreversible process 638 low dose 1430 meter 17
isobaric process 631 Meters 976
M
isochoric 633 method of adding percents 26
MACHOs 1522
isolated system 331 metric system 18
macrostate 662
isothermal 635 Michelson-Morley experiment
magic numbers 1392
isotopes 1389 1240
magnetic confinement 1443
Microgravity 250
J magnetic damping 1014
microlensing 1522
joule 272 magnetic field 960,1067
microshock sensitive 884
Joule’s law 906 magnetic field lines 960,1065
microstate 662
junction rule 922 magnetic field strength
Microwaves 1076,1291
(magnitude) produced by a long
K micturition reflex 478
straight current-carrying wire
Kelvin 532 model 11,45
978
kilocalorie 578 moderate dose 1430
magnetic field strength at the
kilogram 17 Modern physics 14
center of a circular loop 979
kilowatt-hours 301 mole 547
magnetic field strength inside a
kinematics 37,119 moment of inertia 403,403
solenoid 980
kinematics of rotational motion motion 117
magnetic flux 1006
397 Motors 973
magnetic force 962
kinetic energy 275 muon family number 1480
magnetic monopoles 959
kinetic friction 198 Mutual inductance 1032
Magnetic resonance imaging
Kirchhoff’s rules 922 myopia 1156
(MRI) 985
L magnetized 956 N
Laminar 502 magnetocardiogram (MCG) 986 natural frequency 702
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1695
Index 1677
near point 1156 ohmmeters 933 point charge 786
Nearsightedness 1156 optically active 1220 point masses 340
negatively curved 1520 orbital angular momentum 1355 Poiseuille’s law 504
Nerve conduction 886 orbital magnetic field 1355 Poiseuille’s law for resistance
net external force 152 order 1193 504
net rate of heat transfer by order of magnitude 18 polar molecule 792,839
radiation 607 oscillate 677 polarization 781,1213
neutral equilibrium 366 Osmosis 516 polarization microscope 1223
neutralinos 1522 osmotic pressure 516 polarized 794,1213
neutrino 1395 Otto cycle 642 population inversion 1345
neutrino oscillations 1522 overdamped 698 position 38
neutron 1388 overtones 710,746 positively curved 1520
Neutron stars 1515 positron 1398
P
Neutron-induced fission 1447 positron decay 1397
parallel 907
newton 153 positron emission tomography
parallel plate capacitor 834
newton-meters 272 (PET) 1427
parent 1392
Newton’s first law of motion 150, potential difference 819,914
Partial pressure 563
150,185 potential energy 284,285
Particle physics 1467
Newton’s second law of motion potential energy of a spring 284
particle-wave duality 1296,
151 potentiometer 932
1306
Newton’s third law of motion power 298,1119
Pascal’s principle 450
157,186 power factor 1046
Pauli exclusion principle 1363
Newton’s universal law of precision 24
percent relative humidity 567
gravitation 245 presbyopia 1156
percent uncertainty 26
node 745 pressure 444,447,450
perfectly inelastic collision 336
Nodes 710 probability distribution 1302
period 683
non-inertial frame of reference projectile 117
periodic motion 683
241 Projectile motion 117
permeability of free space 978
nonconservative force 288 Proper length 1248
perpendicular lever arm 360
normal force 162 Proper time 1243
phase angle 1046
north magnetic pole 955 proton-proton cycle 1441
phase diagrams 561
notes 751 protons 776,1388
phase-contrast microscope
Nuclear energy 294 PV diagram 559
1223
Nuclear fission 1445
phon 752 Q
Nuclear fusion 1440
Phosphorescence 1344 quality factor 1429
nuclear magnetic resonance
photoconductor 798 quantized 1278
(NMR) 985
photoelectric effect 1281 quantum chromodynamics
nuclear radiation 1380
photomultiplier 1386 1489,1491
nuclear reaction energy 1394
photon 1281,1292 quantum electrodynamics 1471
nucleons 1388
photon energy 1282 Quantum gravity 1512
nuclide 1388
photon momentum 1293 quantum mechanical tunneling
Null measurements 931
physical quantity 16 1411
numerical aperture (NA)(NA)
Physics 7 Quantum mechanics 15,1278
1168
pion 1468 quantum numbers 1357
O pit 228 quarks 333,1482
objective lens 1166 pitch 728,751 quasars 1515
ohm 864 Planck’s constant 1279
R
Ohm’s law 864,904 planetary model of the atom
rad 1428
ohmic 864 1328
PAGE: 1696
1678 Index
Radar 1076 resultant 105 Simple Harmonic Motion 684
radians 229 resultant vector 104 simple harmonic oscillator 684
radiant energy 294 retinex theory of color vision simple pendulum 689
radiation 592,604 1165 simplified theory of color vision
radiation detector 1385 retinexes 1165 1163
radio waves 1064,1072 reverse dialysis 517 single-photon-emission computed
radioactive 1380 Reverse osmosis 517 tomography(SPECT) 1427
Radioactive dating 1400 reversible process 636 slope 80
radioactivity 1380 Reynolds number 510 solenoid 980
radiolytic products 1439 right hand rule 1 962 Solid-state radiation detectors
radiopharmaceutical 1424 right hand rule 2 977 1387
radiotherapy 1436 right-hand rule 426 sonic boom 741
radius of a nucleus 1389 rms current 877 sound 726
radius of curvature 229 rms voltage 877 sound intensity level 734
range 124 rods and cones 1161 sound pressure level 737
range of radiation 1382 roentgen equivalent man 1429 south magnetic pole 955
rate of conductive heat transfer rotation angle 228 space quantization 1356
595 rotational inertia 403 special relativity. 1239
rate of decay 1402 rotational kinetic energy 407, specific gravity 461
ray 1098 408 specific heat 580
Ray tracing 1121 RR factor 597 spin projection quantum number
Rayleigh criterion 1203 Rydberg constant 1330,1336 1360
RC circuit 934 spin quantum number 1360
S
real image 1124 spontaneous symmetry breaking
saturation 564
reflected light is completely 1512
scalar 41,110,824
polarized 1216 stable equilibrium 364
Schwarzschild radius 1515
refraction 1102 Standard Model 1491
scientific method 12
relative biological effectiveness standing wave 709,1068
scintillators 1386
1429 static electricity 773
screening 792
relative humidity 564 static equilibrium 358,368
second 17
relative osmotic pressure 516 static friction 198
second law of motion 325
relative velocities 131 statistical analysis 664
second law of thermodynamics
relativistic Doppler effects 1270 Stefan-Boltzmann law of
639,640,644
Relativistic kinetic energy 1264 radiation 606
second postulate of special
Relativistic momentum 1259 step-down transformer 1024
relativity 1240
relativistic velocity addition step-up transformer 1024
Self-inductance 1033
1254 Stimulated emission 1346
semipermeable 516,886
Relativity 15,131,1239 Stokes’ law 208
series 904
Renewable forms of energy 306 strain 215
shear deformation 215
resistance 864,904 strange 1483
shell 1364
resistivity 867 strangeness 1480
shielding 1433
resistor 904,934 stress 215
shock hazard 880,1027
resonance 702 sublimation 561,591
short circuit 880
resonant 1068 subshell 1364
shunt resistance 929
resonant frequency 1045 Superconductors 1525
SI unit of torque 361
resonate 702 supercriticality 1449
SI units 16
Rest energy 1261 superforce 1511
sievert 1429
rest mass 1259 superposition 708
significant figures 27
restoring force 678 Superstring theory 1492,1518
simple circuit 865
Access for free at openstax.org
PAGE: 1697
Index 1679
surface tension 465 tone 752 very high frequency 1074
synchrotron 1473 top 1488 virtual image 1128
synchrotron radiation 1473 Torque 360,402 virtual particles 1469
system 151 Total energy 1260 viscosity 503
systolic pressure 454,474 total internal reflection 1108 viscous drag 512
trajectory 117 Visible light 1078,1289
T
transformer equation 1024 voltage 819,904
tagged 1424
Transformers 1022 voltage drop 904
tail 104
transverse wave 706,1068 Voltmeters 927
tangential acceleration 394
triple point 561
Television 1074 W
Tunneling 1411
Temperature 530 watt 298
turbulence 502
temperature coefficient of wave 704
resistivity 869 U wave velocity 705
Tensile strength 210 ultra high frequency 1074 wavelength 705,1067
tension 165 ultracentrifuge 234 wavelength in a medium 1187
terminal speed 512 ultrasound 751 waves 677
terminal voltage 916 Ultraviolet (UV) microscopes weakly interacting massive
tesla 962 1222 particles 1522
test charge 786 Ultraviolet radiation 1288 weight 154,161
the second law of ultraviolet radiation (UV) 1079 Wheatstone bridge 933
thermodynamics stated in terms uncertainty 25 WIMPs 1522
of entropy 656 uncertainty in energy 1305 work 270
theory 11 uncertainty in momentum 1303 work-energy theorem 275,408,
theory of quark confinement uncertainty in position 1303 430
1489 uncertainty in time 1305
X
therapeutic ratio 1437 underdamped 698
x rays 1286,1336
thermal agitation 1076 uniform circular motion 227
X-ray 1083
thermal conductivity 595 units 16
x-ray diffraction 1341
thermal energy 288,294,554 unpolarized 1213
xerography 798
thermal equilibrium 536 unstable equilibrium 365
thermal expansion 537 up 1483 Y
thermal hazard 880,1027 useful work 303 y-intercept 80
Thermal stress 542
V Z
thin film interference 1207
Van de Graaff 1473 Zeeman effect 1354
thin lens 1121
Van de Graaff generators 798 zeroth law of thermodynamics
thin lens equations 1125
vapor 562 536
thought experiment 1512
Vapor pressure 563 zz-component of spin angular
three-wire system 1027
vector 41,103,824 momentum 1360
thrust 158,186
vector addition 127,789 zz-component of the angular
timbre 752
vectors 101,788 momentum 1358
time 42
velocity 127
Time dilation 1242
vertically polarized 1213
TOE epoch 1511
