PAGE: 23
Divided hypoglossal canal Foramen or canal located at the anterior end of the
occipital condyles (beneath the condyles). Note if
the canal is divided into two canals; there may also
be a partial division. When noting division, observe
if the bony spicule is within the canal or on the
lateral or medial aspects.
Epiteric bone Accessory bone located at the intersection of the
frontal, parietal, sphenoid, and temporal bones.
Foramen ovale Located on the inferior aspect of each of the greater
wings; they are the only holes (foramina) of the
sphenoid that are oval in shape.
Foramen rotundum Most anterior and medial of the sphenoidal
foramina; circular holes in each of the cranial fossae
of the greater wings.
Foramen spinosum Located on the inferior aspect of each of the greater
wings, these foramina are the most lateral foramina
on the sphenoid and generally the smallest of the
circular holes in the sphenoid.
Frontal grooves Supraorbital, shallow grooves which are tracks for
vessels and nerves. May be seen running into the
supraorbital notch/foramen. May or may not be
present.
Inca bone (bipartite, tripartite) A transverse suture divided the squamous portion of
the occipital, creating an accessory bone. The Inca
bone is seen at a higher frequency among South
American populations. The Inca bone may be
singular, bipartite or tripartite. If bipartite an
vertical suture will separate the bone into two
pieces, if tripartite two vertical sutures will separate
the bone into three pieces.
PAGE: 24
Infraorbital foramen Additional foramen located medially, inferior to the
lower margin of the orbit on the maxillary bone.
One is always present.
Infraorbital suture Accessory suture located medially, inferior to the
lower margin of the orbit on the maxillary bone.
Generally runs between the margin of the orbit and
the infraorbital foramen. May be either complete or
partial.
Inion spike Ridge or inferiorly projecting hook of bone in the
region of the external occipital protuberance; most
often seen in males.
Marginal tubercle A protuberance in the region of the masseteric
muscle attachment on the inferior margin of the
zygomas.
Mastoid foramen Single or multiple foramina located within the
occipitomastoid suture, or near the suture on either
the temporal or occipital. Number and location
should always be noted during observation.
Maxillary torus Bulging protuberance located on the lingual
margins of the alveoli near the maxillary molars.
Generally, maxillary tori are associated with culture
groups that use their teeth as tools.
Metopic suture Divides the frontal bone, located at midline.
Generally closes by eight years of age. If present, it
should be scored as complete or partial.
(Mann and Hunt 2005)
Os Japonicum Additional suture dividing each zygomatic into two
pieces.
Ossicles or wormian bones Aberrant growth patterns may be manifested by
sutural complexities represented by small islands of
bone.
PAGE: 25
Pacchionian pits Pits with sharply defined margins located on the
frontal and parietals, vary in size from small to
large. (Mann and Hunt 2005)
Palatine torus Bulging protuberance located on the along the
lingual aspect of the palatine suture. Generally, a
palatine torus is associated with culture groups that
use their teeth as tools.
Parietal foramen Single foramen located on the posterior aspect of
the parietal along the saggital suture near obelion.
Each parietal may display a foramen, although the
foramen may be either absent or within the suture
itself. Very large or misshapen parietal foramen are
sometimes observed, and should be recorded.
Parietal notch bone Extrasutural bone located in the squamosal suture;
anterior to asterion. May be unilateral, bilateral, or
absent.
Pharyngeal tubercle/fossa Round depression or smooth projection located in
the center of the basilar aspect of the occipital, on
the ectocranial surface.
Pterygo-alar bridge/spur Bridge or spicule of bone originating either on the
lateral pterygoid lamina or on the lateral aspect of
the foramen ovale.
Pterygo-spinous bridge/spur Bridge or spicule of bone origination either on the
lateral pterygoid lamina or on the medial aspect of
the foramen ovale.
Supraorbital foramen Complete foramina located along the superior
margins of the orbits (anterior frontal).
Completeness can be measured by passing a thin
pipe cleaner through the foramina. Number should
be observed for each orbit.
PAGE: 26
Supraorbital notch Notches located along the superior margins of the
orbits (anterior frontal). Number should be
observed for each orbit.
Trochlear spine Small, sharply-curved bony projection within the
orbit; located on the medial aspect of the frontal
within the orbit. May also be represented by a
notch without the bony projection. Trait may be
unilateral, bilateral, or absent (trait is rare). (Mann
and Hunt 2005)
Tympanic dehiscence Hole perforating the tympanic plate or the temporal
bone; located on the inferior aspect of the external
auditory meatus. Size should be observed if
present. May be bilateral, although presence of the
trait is rare. (Mann and Hunt 2005)
Zygomatico-facial foramen Single or multiple foramen located on the convex
surface of the zygomatics, inferior to the orbital
margin. This trait may also be absent; number and
size (large or small) should be noted during
observation.
Mandibular
Mandibular torus Bulging protuberance located on the lingual
margins of the alveoli near the mandibular molars.
Generally, mandibular tori are associated with
culture groups that use their teeth as tools.
Mental Foramen Foramina located on each side of the labial aspect
of the mandible inferior to the second premolar.
Usually singular, but may be multiple.
Mylohyoid bridge Bony bridge crossing the mylohyoid sulcus; may be
partial or complete.
PAGE: 27
Articulations of the Cranial Bones with One Another
Sphenoid Lacrimal Vomer
Vomer Frontal Sphenoid
Ethmoid Ethmoid Ethmoid
Frontal Inferior nasal concha Palatines
Occipital Maxilla Maxilla
Parietal
Temporal Maxilla Ethmoid
Zygomatic Frontal Sphenoid
Palatine Ethmoid Frontal
Zygomatic Maxilla
Occipital Inferior nasal concha Palatines
Parietal Vomer Vomer
Temporal Lacrimal Inferior nasal concha
Sphenoid Maxilla Lacrimal
Atlas Nasal
Palatine Inferior Nasal Concha
Frontal Mandible Ethmoid
Sphenoid Lacrimal
Parietal Mandible Maxilla
Ethmoid Temporal Palatine
Lacrimal Maxilla
Nasal Nasal
Zygomatic Zygomatic Nasal
Maxilla Frontal Maxilla
Sphenoid Frontal
Parietal Maxilla
Occipital Temporal Palatine
Frontal Sphenoid
Temporal Temporal Ethmoid
Sphenoid Occipital Maxilla
Parietal Sphenoid Inferior nasal concha
Parietal Vomer
Zygomatic Palatine
Mandible
PAGE: 28
Landmarks and Measurements of the Skull
Standardized landmarks and measurements of the skull and post-cranium are
necessary in order to compare validity as part of the scientific method. These
measurements can be used to determine sex, biological affinity, stature, modernity, and
specific facial features in the remains of an unknown individual. Therefore, it is
necessary to use agreed upon landmarks on the skull from which the measurements can
be taken. To increase reliability, an individual researcher should take the same
measurements on an individual(s) several times over the course of a few days to estimate
intra-observer error. Research partners should undertake the same process to determine
what the error rate may be between researchers, inter-observer error. The following list
of landmarks and basic measurements will aid in learning standardized methodology used
in osteological research.
Landmarks
Alveolare The bony crest located between the central maxillary incisors.
Alare Determined using sliding calipers placed on the most lateral
margins of the nasal aperture.
Basion Point located on the anterior border of the foramen magnum.
Bregma The point where the sagittal suture meets the coronal suture
anteriorly.
Dacryon Located in the medial aspect of the orbits, the point where the
maxilla, lacrimal, and frontal meet.
Ectoconchion Located at the intersection of the frontal and zygomatic, on the
medial aspect.
Euryon Determined using spreading calipers placed on the posterior
parietals at the greatest breadth.
Frontotemporale Located on each of the temporal lines of the frontal in the area of
greatest constriction.
Glabella The point superior to the nasal bones, between the supraorbital
ridges.
PAGE: 29
Gnathion The central point on the inferior aspect of the mandibular body in
the region of the mental eminence.
Infradentale The bony crest located between the mandibular central incisors.
Lambda The intersection point of the lambdoidal suture and the sagittal
suture.
Nasion The point located most superiorly where the nasal bones meet.
Nasiospinale The point where the midsagittal plane intersects the inferior margin
of the nasal aperture.
Opisthion The most medial point on the posterior aspect of the foramen
magnum.
Opisthocranion Most posterior aspect of the skull, excluding the area around the
external occipital protuberance.
Orbitale The most inferior point on the lower orbital margin.
Prosthion On the upper alveolar process, this is the most anterior point at
midline.
Zygion Determined using spreading calipers placed on the most lateral
aspects of the zygomatic arches.
Measurements
Basion-Bregma Taken using the spreading calipers; one end of the calipers
is placed on the medial aspect of the rim of the foramen
magnum (basion) and the other end is placed at intersection
of the coronal and sagittal sutures (bregma).
Bizygomatic Taken using the spreading calipers; one end of the calipers
goes to the most lateral aspect of each of the zygomatic
arches (zygoma to zygoma).
Cranial breadth Taken using the spreading calipers; one end of the calipers
goes to the most lateral aspect of each of the parietals
(euryon to euryon).
PAGE: 30
Cranial length Taken using the spreading calipers; one end of the calipers
is placed just superior to the frontonasal suture on the most
anterior aspect of the frontal (glabella), while the other is
placed at the most posterior aspect of the skull
(opisthocranion).
Minimum frontal breadth Taken using the spreading calipers; one end of the calipers
is placed on each of the temporal lines of the frontal in the
area of greatest constriction (frontotemporale to
frontotemporale).
Nasal breadth Measurement is taken from alare to alare, to obtain the
maximum breadth; use spreading calipers.
Nasal height Measurement is taken from nasion to nasiospinale; use
sliding calipers.
Orbital breadth Measurement is taken from dacryon to ectoconchion; use
spreading calipers.
Orbital height Measurement is taken perpendicular to the horizontal axis
of the orbit; use spreading calipers.
Total facial height Measurement is taken from nasion to gnathion with teeth in
occlusion; use sliding calipers.
Upper facial height Measurement is taken from nasion to alveolare (does not
include height of the mandible); use sliding calipers.
Estimating Age in the Skull
Determining age at death is largely based upon dental eruption, dental
calcification, dental wear, suture fusion, epiphyseal union of the postcranial bones, and
degenerative changes (i.e. arthritis). Size and general appearance have little utility. In
general, the older the individual at the time of death, the less accurate is the age estimate.
Determining age requires comparison with tables of developmental norms.
There can be considerable variation in the degree in which individuals vary from
the average of development. Tables of norms should thus be regarded only as
approximations.
PAGE: 31
Dental Calcification, Eruption, and Wear
Development of the dentition occurs at approximately 3-7 months in utero and
continue until the late teens or early twenties. Radiographic examination of the dentition
shows the development of the crown, root, and closure of the root, which can be used to
determine age. For further reading on dental calcification see Moorrees et al. (1963),
Age Variation of Formation Stages for Ten Permanent Teeth in the Journal of Dental
Research, 42:1490-1502.
Eruption of the teeth into the mouth begins to occur around nine months of age.
Each tooth has a general age of eruption, but this can vary from a few months to a few
years as each child develops along a different trajectory. Ubelaker (1978) prepared a
diagram for use in aging children going through dental eruption, this diagram is widely
used in the discipline to estimate age at death. A quick table of eruption is listed below.
Dental eruption sequence
1. Deciduous teeth present 8 mon. – 6 years
2. First molar erupted 6 years
3. Second molar erupted 12 years
4. Third molar erupted 18-21 years
5. Medial incisors erupted 6-11 years
Dental wear or attrition occurs as the teeth erupt into the mouth. As an individual
chews the topmost layer of tooth is ground off. As an individual ages, the amount of
wear increases first through the enamel and then to the dentine. Individuals of advanced
age or those eating course foods may wear the teeth to the point the crown is absent, and
the root then becomes the masticatory surface. Due to the variability in the texture of
foods eaten, dental wear may make an individual appear older or younger. For example,
modern populations consuming extremely soft foods will show a much reduced dental
wear. Other activities may also be responsible for tooth wear including bruxism and
using the teeth as tools. Prehistoric tool use included working hides and doing light
PAGE: 32
Dental Eruption (Ubelaker 1978)
Dental Wear (Brothwell 1981)
PAGE: 33
retouch on lithics, while today teeth may be used as tools to open packaging. Brothwell
(1981) developed a general system for dental wear that is helpful in aging older
individuals.
Aging Adult Remains Through Suture Closure
Once dental eruption is complete, aging of specimens becomes more difficult.
Degenerative changes that are visually observable, including arthritis and dental wear, are
two of the most effective methods which can be used to determine the age of an adult.
Cranial suture closure may also be used, but in general will provide broad ranges into
which a specimen will fall. Sutures should be recorded as unobservable, open (no
evidence of closure), minimal closure (up to 50% closure observed), significant closure
(mostly fused, but not complete), complete obliteration (totally fused) (Buikstra and
Ubelaker 1994).
1. Fusion of basilar suture 17-23 years
2. No fusion at spheno-temporal joint 17-29 years
3. Fusion beginning at Spheno-temporal/spheno-parietal joint 29-65 years
4. Spheno-temporal/spheno-parietal joint fused 65+ years
Degenerative Change in the Skull
A few degenerative changes exist that can be used in aging including biparietal
thinning, alveolar resporption, and arthritis of the occipital condyles and mandibular
fossae. Biparietal thinning begins on the external table of the lateral and posterior aspects
of the parietals. The parietal bosses will appear flattened in nature (Mann and Hunt
2005). This is generally seen in individuals of advanced age, likely 50 years or older.
Alveolar resporption is the product of tooth loss, decrease in bone density associated with
age, and also periodontal disease. The alveoli shrink, and as teeth are shed the sockets
fill in. The two areas where movement occur in the skull are the occipital condyles and
mandibular fossae. At these articulation sites osteophytic lipping or erosion may be
present, both of which suggest an age of 35 years of older. Lipping is represented by
small ridges or spicules of bone within or around the margins of the surface. Erosion is
PAGE: 34
26-41
24-38
24-38
23-35
23-35
22-29
23-35
26-42
26-42
26-47
Cranial Suture Closure
PAGE: 35
seen as pitting with irregular margins within the surface area, increase porosity will also
be seen around and within the erosive area.
Estimating Sex in the Skull
Physical anthropologists are often called upon to identify skeletal remains; this
may be for archaeological or forensic remains. Due to substantial individual and
populational variation, the reliability of such attempts is rather limited. Moreover, much
practice and guidance is required to achieve reliable conclusions. The following is meant
to provide only some familiarity with the methods employed.
While virtually all bones display some sexual dimorphism, the pelvis is the most
reliable for identification. Using the skull alone is less accurate. In cases of adult crania
with which there is neither lower jaw, nor any other part of the skeleton, the diagnosis is
about 80 percent reliable. This proportion rises to 90 percent where a well-preserved
lower jaw is present; and will reach 96 to 98 percent when a whole skeleton is present.
Although there will still remain skeletons which, even though complete, show such
ambiguous sexual characteristics that it will be impossible to identify them as either male
or female with certainty. The following are cranial traits used in sex assessment:
Overall size – Larger in males; smaller in females.
Muscle attachments – Stronger in males exhibited by roughening; females are generally
more smooth overall.
Cranium
External occipital protuberance – More pronounced in males; rounded and smooth in
females.
Forehead – Retreating in males; smooth, round, more vertical and better developed
frontal eminences in females.
Glabella – Protrudes in males; smooth in females.
Mastoid process – Large in males; small in females.
Palate – Males are larger and broader; females display less depth.
Supra-mastoid crest – Larger and extend past the external auditory meatus in males.
Supraorbital margins – Rounded and thick in males; sharp and thin in females.
PAGE: 36
Supraorbital ridges – More pronounced in males; flat and smooth in females.
Zygomatic bones – higher, stouter, and rugged in males.
Zygomatic processes – Heavier in males; more slender in females.
Mandible
Mental eminence – Square and broad in males; v-shaped and narrow in females.
Gonial angle – Less obtuse in males (stouter, rougher, and more everted angles); an
angle over 125 degrees suggests female sex.
Estimating Biological Affinity in the Skull
Assessing biological affinity in the skeleton cannot be done with a promise of
great accuracy. Nonetheless, legal authorities often wish to have as much information for
identification as possible. This is especially true when a burial is found, and it is
suspected that the person was the victim of foul play.
Bear in mind that in all populations male skulls tend to be more rugged than
females, and that this will complicate the assessment. Also remember that these
characteristics are merely typical and not diagnostic, as they may be seen at variable
frequencies in all human populations.
The following may be used in assessment of biological affinity:
Australian Aborigine
Long cranium, deep set orbits, well developed brow ridges, pronounced post-
orbital constriction
San Bushman
Very short face, extremely prominent forehead, gracile skull form
American Indian
Round cranium, nasal overgrowth, shovel-shaped incisors, edge to edge bite,
central incisors rotated toward midline, prominent zygomatics, smooth orbits,
straight face
American Black
Long cranium, short face, smooth brow ridges, wide nasal aperture, nasal gutter,
bregmatic depression, overbite, alveolar prognathism.
PAGE: 37
Male Skull
PAGE: 38
Male Skull
PAGE: 39
Female Skull
PAGE: 40
Female Skull
PAGE: 41
Euro-American
Variable cranial shape, variable size, narrow and orthognathic face, nasal sill,
narrow nasal aperture, highly angled nasals, overbite, highest frequency of
Carabelli’s cusp.
Cranial Deformation & Cranial Trauma
Cranial deformation – Two major types of cranial deformation may be observed:
artificial and accidental. Artificial deformation is practiced purposely by a number of
cultures globally, and can be meant to show social status, ethnic affiliation, or beauty.
Pressure may be placed on the frontal, occipital, or circumferentially. Accidental
deformation occurs when an infant is strapped to a cradle board for a long period of time,
or if an infant is allowed to lay flat on their back. Both accidental forms are known to
create flat spots on the back of the cranium.
Fractures - Depression fractures are most commonly seen in the cranium; bone is pressed
inward and may affect any of the three structures of the cranial vault bones.
Gun shot wounds – Circular holes with distinct edges. The entry wound smaller and has
a beveled inner table. The exit wound is larger, has beveling of the outer table, and
frequently has small fragments associated. Fractures will likely be seen radiating away
from the wound, but will end at the cranial sutures. A solid diagnosis would include a
use of a radiograph that should show small fragments of metal embedded in the bone
(Aufderheide and Rodriguez-Martin 1998).
Trephination – Early form of cranial surgery. Purpose is unknown, but speculation
includes decreasing cranial pressure and allowing detrimental spirits to escape. Two
forms are common, scraping and cutting. Users of the scraping method employ a sharp
surface and scrape across the cranium until a hole is made. A sharp tool is also employed
in the cutting method, however instead of scraping the individual will make linear cuts
creating a square fragment of bone that is popped out after perforating the full thickness
of the bone. In either method, it is necessary to not penetrate too deeply to protect the
dura which aids in holding infection at bay.
PAGE: 42
Cut marks – Sharp weapons will leave sharply defined margins, and may be observed as
elongated v-shaped marks (Aufderheide and Rodriguez-Martin 1998). It is important to
note that cut marks occur during excavation and also in the lab during observation. These
accidental marks can be differentiated from antemortem/perimortem cut marks on the
basis of color. Accidental marks will be lighter in color than the surrounding bone, while
the antemortem/perimortem marks will be the same color as the surrounding bone.
Cranial Pathology
Cribra Orbitalia – Appears on the roofs of the orbits as an increase in porosity or
expansion of the diploe into the orbital cavity. Cribra Orbitalia is thought to be a general
indicator of anemia, although the cause could be a variety of things including
malnutrition, parasites, or other physiological illness.
Porotic Hyperostosis – May appear ectocranially as increased porosity with an associated
thickening of the bone. Can only be confirmed through radiography; a “hair-on-end”
appearance of the diploe. Porotic Hyperostosis is thought to be a general indicator of
anemia, although the cause could be a variety of things including malnutrition, parasites,
or other physiological illness.
Craniosynostoses - Early closure of the cranial vault sutures. Depending on the suture
that fuses early, the shape of the cranium will become distorted.
PAGE: 43
Lateral view of the skull.
PAGE: 44
Frontal view of the skull.
PAGE: 45
Inferior view of the skull.
PAGE: 46
-
-- - -
PAGE: 47
Top – frontal bone. Bottom – parietal bone.
Top – maxillary bone.
Bottom left – lacrimal bone. Bottom right – palatine bone.
PAGE: 48
Top – ethmoid. Middle – zygomatic.
Bottom Left – hyoid. Bottom Right – vomer.
PAGE: 49
Top – temporal bone. Bottom – sphenoid bone.
PAGE: 50
Occipital Bone
PAGE: 51
Mandible
PAGE: 52
Top – Malleus. Middle – Incus. Bottom – Stapes.
PAGE: 53
Post-Cranial Bones
Locate and identify the features noted below for the post-cranial bones. Pay
particular attention to the morphology of the epiphyses as these can be used in
distinguishing side in complete and fragmentary remains.
Humerus Ulna
Head Olecranon process
Neck Trochlear or semi-lunar notch
Greater and lesser tubercles Radial notch
Shaft Coronoid process
Trochlea Shaft
Coronoid fossa Head
Olecranon fossa Styloid process
Lateral and medial epicondyles
Capitulum
Intertubercular or bicipital groove
Deltoid tuberosity
Surgical neck
Radius
Head
Neck
Radial tuberosity
Shaft
Styloid process
Ulnar notch
Dorsal tubercles
PAGE: 54
Humerus. Left anterior and right posterior.
PAGE: 55
Ulna. Left anterior, center lateral, and right posterior.
PAGE: 56
Radius. Left anterior and right posterior.
PAGE: 57
Humerus
PAGE: 58
_;r-
-- -
)/
,
I
I
J
-
-
Left – radius. Right – ulna.
PAGE: 59
Femur Patella
Head Medial facet (smaller)
Neck Lateral facet (larger)
Greater and Lesser Trochanters Base
Linea Aspera Apex
Lateral and medial condyles
Intercondyloid fossa
Shaft
Lateral and medial epicondyles
Fovea capitis femoris
Fibula Tibia
Styloid process Medial and lateral condyles
Shaft Tibial tuberosity
Lateral malleolus Shaft
Malleolar fossa Anterior crest
Medial malleolous
Interosseous crest
Popliteal lines
Intercondyloid tubercles and fossa
PAGE: 60
Femur. Left anterior and right posterior.
PAGE: 61
Patella. Left anterior and right posterior.
PAGE: 62
Tibia. Left anterior and right posterior.
PAGE: 63
Fibula, left anterior and right posterior.
PAGE: 64
Non-Metric Traits of the Appendages
Bipartite patella Division of the patella at the insertion site
for the vastus lateralis muscle. Similar to
the vastus notch, but has an accessory bone
present. The area of division will be porous,
centrally roughened, and smooth margins.
Seen at a higher frequency among males.
Septal aperture Perforation of the olecranon process, may be
large or small. Seen at a slightly higher
frequency among females.
Supratrochlear spine Bony projection a the attachment site for the
pronator teres muscle on the inferior portion
of the anterior aspect of the humeral shaft.
Vastus Notch Division of the patella at the insertion site
for the vastus lateralis muscle. The notch
area is smooth, flat, and lacking in porosity.
PAGE: 65
(
I
I
I
Femur and Patella
PAGE: 66
Tibia (medial) and Fibula (lateral)
PAGE: 67
Bones of the Hand
Eight carpal bones, in two rows, make up the bones of each wrist. The articular
surface formed by the proximal row is convex and articulates with the distal end of the
radius. The ulna takes no direct part in the wrist joint. Observe that the palmar side of
the carpals are arched so as to form a tunnel through which pass the tendons and muscles
of the forearm responsible for flexion of the fingers. The extensor tendons similarly lie
on the back of the wrist, less protected. The majority of the movements of the hand, with
the major exception of the opposition of the thumb, are brought about by muscles which
lie in the forearm; some of these muscles originate as high as the epicondyles of the
humerus.
The bones of the palm are known as the metacarpals, four of which are bound
together by ligaments while the thumb is freely moveable. Those bones making up the
fingers are the phalanges. The phalanges closest to the write are the proximal, further out
medial, and making up the finger tips the distal phalanges.
Notes on Siding*
Navicular/Scaphoid – Concave surface toward you with the tubercle pointing superiorly;
the bone belongs to the side to which the tubercle points.
Lunate – Place the flat surface down, concave surface facing you, the remaining facet
will rise upward toward the side from which it comes.
Triquetral– Between your fingers, place the two facets that come together. The bone
should be vertical with the largest facet toward you. The remaining facet will point
toward the side from which it comes.
Pisiform – With the non-articular surface pointing superiorly and the facet facing you, a
groove will be located on the side from which the bone comes.
Greater Multangular – Lay the bone on the table with the tubercle pointing superiorly and
away from you, with the concave surfaces lateral and there will be a groove next to the
tubercle on the side from which the bone comes.
Lesser Multangular – This bone has a boot shape in appearance. Take the boot and put
the sole on the table, with the v-shaped toe pointing toward you. The toe of the boot
points toward the side from which it comes.
PAGE: 68
Capitate – The head should be placed superiorly and the long narrow articulation toward
you, the bone belongs to the side on which the long narrow articulation is observed.
Hamate – The hook and facets should be positioned away from you, with the flat surface
down and the hook will lean toward the side from which it comes.
*Siding of the hands after White 2000.
PAGE: 69
Navicular. Right side. Left view from capitate and right radial articulation.
Lunate. Right side. Left view from the capitate and non-articular view.
Pisiform. Right side. Left view from triquetral and left palmar view.
Greater Multangular or Trapezium. Right side.
PAGE: 70
Capitate. Left side. Left view from the hamate and right view from the scaphoid and
trapezoid.
Hamate. Right side. Left view from triquetral, middle left view from the fourth and fifth
metacarpal bases, middle right view from the capitate.
Triquetral. Left side. Middle view from the triquetral.
PAGE: 71
Metacarpal 1. Right side. Left palmar and right dorsal.
Metacarpal 2. Left side. Left medial, middle left lateral, middle right dorsal, right
proximal base.
PAGE: 72
Metacarpal 3. Right side. Left medial, middle left palmar, middle right lateral, right
proximal base.
Metacarpal 4. Right side. Left medial, middle left palmar, middle right lateral, right
proximal base.
PAGE: 73
Metacarpal 5. Right side. Left medial, middle left palmar, middle right lateral, right
proximal base.
First Proximal Phalange of the Hand. Left dorsal, middle palmar, right proximal base.
PAGE: 74
Proximal Non-First Phalanges of the Hand. Left dorsal, middle palmar, right proximal
base.
Medial Phalanges of the Hand. Left dorsal and right palmar.
First Distal Phalange of the Hand. Left dorsal and right palmar.
PAGE: 75
Hand
PAGE: 76
Bones of the Feet
The tarsus or posterior portion of the foot is comprised of seven individual bones.
A part of the ankle joint is formed by the talus: articulating superiorly and medially with
the tibia, laterally with the fibula, inferiorly with the calcaneus, and distally with the
navicular bone. The calcaneus or heel is the largest of the tarsal bones, it is located
inferiorly and posteriorly in the foot. The other tarsal bones are the cuboid, navicular,
and three cuneiform bones. Between the first metatarsal bone and the first cuneiform
bone the tarso-metatarsal joint does not allow opposition between the great toe and the
remaining digits as in some lower primate forms. In man, the analog in the hand
represented by the first carpo-metacarpal joints does permit this unique function.
The middle portion of the foot is made up of the metatarsal bones. The phalanges
are the toe bones. Only a proximal and distal phalanx are present in the great toe while
the other digits have a middle phalanx as well.
The tarsal bones are much larger than the carpal bones due to their weight bearing
requirements. The tarsals and metatarsals form a unit with a limited degree of flexibility.
The articulation of the talus and distal epiphysis of the tibia and fibula allow for a strictly
hinge-like motion. The most flexible joints within the tarsals are those between the
anterior surface of the talus and the navicular, and between the anterior surface of the
calcaneus and the cuboid. The motions by which the sole of the foot may be slightly
turned medially or laterally, take place at these two joints. Observation of the sole of the
articulated foot skeleton will show a considerable concavity between the tuberosity of the
calcaneus and the distal ends of the metatarsals. This concavity in life is filled with
muscles and any weakening of this arch causes the weight of the body to come to rest on
the muscles with painful results. Note the firm articulation between the tarsals and the
proximal portions of the metatarsals.
The phalanges of the foot may be readily distinguished from those of the hand by
their shortness and roundness of the shaft.
PAGE: 77
Notes on Siding*
Calcaneus Place heel posteriorly, sustentaculum tali (projection) is medial. The
projection points toward the opposite side from which the bone comes.
Talus - Place the rounded head anteriorly, the trochlear surface for the tibia is
superior, the straightest side is medial, and the angular projecting
articulation points laterally. The angular projection points toward the side
from which the bone comes.
Navicular Position the concave surface posteriorly, the convex surface should be
anterior with the wide surface superior and the tuberosity medial. The
tuberosity points toward the side from which the bone comes.
Cuboid Hold the large non-articulating surface toward you, the tuberosity points
toward the side from which the bone comes.
Cuneiform I Represents the largest of the cuneiform bones. The large articulating
surface is anterior, the sharp ridge superior, and the rough surface without
any articulation is medial.
Cuneiform II Represents the smallest of the cuneiform bones. If the rectangular rough
surface without articulations is placed superiorly, the concave triangular
facet posteriorly, then the surface with “L” shaped facets is medial.
Cuneiform III Medium in size compared to the other cuneiform bones. If the rectangular
rough surface without articulations is placed superiorly, the triangular
articulation posterior (small notch at the apex), then the surface with the
two small facets is medial.
*Siding of the hands after White 2000.
PAGE: 78
Non-Metric Traits of the Feet
Bipartite anterior calcaneal facet Division of the anterior calcaneal facet.
(Mann and Hunt 2005).
Calcaneus secondarius Accessory bone on the anterior aspect of the
anterior calcaneal facet. Notch on the
calcaneal facet will be porous, centrally
roughened, and concave (Mann and Hunt
2005).
Os trigonum Accessory bone in the area of the posterior
tubercle of the talus (Mann and Hunt 2005).
PAGE: 79
Calcaneus. Right side. Left superior, middle inferior, and right anterior view.
Calcaneus. Right side. Top lateral and bottom medial.
PAGE: 80
Talus. Left side. Left superior and right inferior.
Talus. Left side. Left medial and right lateral.
PAGE: 81
Navicular. Left side. Left articulation with talus, middle articulation with cuneiforms,
and right non-articular view.
Cuboid. Right side. Left non-articular view, middle cuboid tuberosity, right view from
the lateral cuneiform.
Cuboid. Right side. Left view from the calcaneus and right view from the 4th and 5th
metatarsal bases.
PAGE: 82
Cuneiform I. Left side. Left view from navicular, middle left medial view, middle right
kidney shaped articulation, right view from 2nd cuneiform.
Cuneiform II. Left side. Left view from navicular, middle view from 3rd cuneiform,
right view from 1st cuneiform.
Cuneiform III. Left side. Left view from 2nd cuneiform, middle left Africa shaped
articulation, middle right view from navicular, right view from cuboid.
PAGE: 83
Metatarsal 1. Left side. Left medial, middle left plantar, middle right lateral, right
dorsal, bottom proximal base.
Metatarsal 2. Left side. Left medial, middle left plantar, middle right lateral, right
proximal base.
PAGE: 84
Metatarsal 3. Left side. Left medial, middle left plantar, middle right lateral, right
proximal base.
Metatarsal 4. Left side. Left medial, middle left plantar, middle right lateral, right
proximal base.
PAGE: 85
Metatarsal 5. Right side. Left medial, middle left plantar, middle right lateral, right
proximal base.
Proximal Phalanges of First Toe. Left dorsal, middle plantar, right distal articulation.
Proximal Phalanges of Non-First Toes. Left dorsal, middle plantar, right proximal base.
PAGE: 86
Medial Phalanges.
Distal Phalanges. Left dorsal, middle plantar, and right proximal base.
PAGE: 87
Foot
PAGE: 88
The Vertebral Column and Thorax
Sternum
Manubrium – bone that is trapezoidal in shape, makes up the superior aspect of the
sternum.
Jugular notch – concave notches on either side of the superior aspect of the manubrium,
for articulation with the clavicles.
Corpus or body – flat, rectangular bone making up the major portion of the sternum. The
lateral aspects contain the notches for the true ribs, called the costal notches.
Xiphoid process – variably shaped bone found at the inferior aspect of the corpus.
Process may fuse late in life to the corpus.
Clavicle
Sternal end – rounded end, articulates with manubrium.
Acromial end – flat end, articulates with scapula.
Conoid tuberosity – muscle attachment located on the inferior aspect of the shaft,
pointing posteriorly.
Ribs Scapulae
Head Ventral surface
Neck Dorsal surface
Tubercle Spine
Shaft Coracoid process
Costal groove Acromion
Glenoid fossa
Axillary margin
Medial angle
Vertebral margin
PAGE: 89
Manubrium. Left anterior aspect, right posterior aspect.
Sternum and Xyphoid Process. Left anterior aspect, right posterior aspect.
PAGE: 90
Clavicle. Left side. Top superior and bottom inferior.
PAGE: 91
First Rib. Left superior and right inferior.
Second Rib. Left inferior and right superior.
PAGE: 92
Typical Rib. Left inferior and right superior.
PAGE: 93
Eleventh Rib. Left posterior view and left superior view.
Twelfth Rib. Top shows anterior view and bottom shows posterior view.
PAGE: 94
Scapula. Left side. Top anterior and bottom posterior.
PAGE: 95
Scapula. Top lateral and bottom superior.
PAGE: 96
Clavicle
Sternum
PAGE: 97
,
.
\ \
\
Scapula
PAGE: 98
, • I.,
"
Ribs
PAGE: 99
Vertebrae
Body - Development of the vertebrae can be used in aging of individuals. In the first
stage of development there are three separate portions, the two neural arches and the
body. The neural arches fuse to each other first, around age 2-4 years of age. The body
and neural arches later fuse at approximately 3-6 years of age. The body of a juvenile
vertebra will exhibit billowing around the margins; these disappear as the end plates fuse
to the body.
Foramen - Central hole through which the spinal cord passes.
Transverse foramina - Foramen on each of the transverse processes of the cervical
vertebrae. Through these foramina the vertebral arteries pass.
Arches – Encloses the spinal column.
Spinous process – Posteriorly projecting aspect of the vertebra; attachment for muscles
and ligaments that varies in size.
Superior articular facets & Inferior articular facets – Oval shaped facets located on the
superior and inferior aspects of the posterior part of the vertebrae. As they articulate with
each other, they are faced in opposite directions depending on their location in the spinal
column.
Characteristics Cervical (7) Thoracic (12) Lumbar (5)
Body Shape Oval Round Heart
Body Size Small Medium Large
Vertebral Foramen Rounded Round Triangular
Transverse Process Small Large Large and blunt
Transverse Foramen Present Absent Absent
Spinous Process 2-6 Bifid Long, projects Thick and
inferiorly horizontal
Articulating Facets Superior: face Superior: face Superior: face
posterior posterior, flat medially, curved
Inferior: face Inferior: face Inferior: face
anterior anterior, flat laterally, curved
Costal Facets None On body and None
transverse processes
PAGE: 100
Non-Metric Traits of the Vertebral Column and Thorax
Rhomboid fossa In the area where the costoclavicular
ligament attaches, there may be a
depression, crest, or plateau.
Os acromiale Lack of fusion of the acromial epiphysis,
presents with rounded margins on the
epiphysis and acromion.
PAGE: 101
Atlas. Top superior and bottom inferior.
PAGE: 102
Axis. Top superior and bottom anterior.
PAGE: 103
Cervical Vertebrae. Top posterior, middle inferior, bottom superior.
PAGE: 104
Thoracic Vertebrae. Top posterior, middle inferior, bottom superior.
PAGE: 105
Lumbar Vertebrae. Top posterior, middle inferior, bottom superior.
PAGE: 106
Top – Cervical. Middle – Thoracic. Bottom – Lumbar.
PAGE: 107
The Pelvic Girdle
Sacrum
A continuation of the vertebral column, the sacrum is composed of five fused
vertebrae. Where the sacrum meets with the fifth lumbar vertebra it is widest, decreasing
in size inferiorly. The sacrum also makes up the posterior aspect of the pelvic girdle.
Base
Apex
Promontory
Ventral surface
Transverse ridges
Anterior sacral foramina
Dorsal surface
Medial sacral crest
Posterior sacral foramina
Lateral surface – Wings or ala
Coccyx
Four very small vertebrae found at the apex of the sacrum which are fused in
adults, but are often absent in archaeological specimens. The corunae are the only
landmarks seen on the coccyx, which are tubercles projecting superiorly from the body of
the coccyx.
PAGE: 108
Sacrum. Top anterior and bottom posterior.
PAGE: 109
Sacrum. Lateral view.
PAGE: 110
Superior coccygeal body. Left view anterior and right view posterior.
Inferior coccygeal elements. Left view anterior, middle view posterior, right view
superior articulation.
Superior and inferior coccygeal elements articulated.
PAGE: 111
Innominate
The innominate is made up of three bones which fuse late during the adolescent
phase, including the ilium, ischium, and pubis. The bones fuse together at the center of
the acetabulum, the fossa in which the femur articulates, each making up part of the
articulation.
Ilium
Iliac crest
Greater sciatic notch
Lesser sciatic notch
Iliac tuberosity
Preauricular sulcus
Auricular surface
Iliac fossa
Anterior superior and inferior spines
Ischium
Ischial tuberosity
Pubis
Pubic symphyses
Structures formed by the intersection of the three bones of the innominate:
Obturator foramen
Acetabulum
Lunate face
Fossa
1
PAGE: 112
Innominate. Anterior view.
2
PAGE: 113
Innominate. Posterior view.
3
PAGE: 114
Non-Metric Traits of the Pelvic Girdle
Accessory iliac facet Additional facet located on the iliac
tuberosity in the area that articulates with
the sacrum. May be unilateral or bilateral.
Accessory sacral facet Additional facet located on the posterior
aspect of the sacrum near the first sacral
foramen. May be unilateral or bilateral.
Acetabular mark/notch U-shaped depression located in the superior
aspect of the acetabulum on the lunate
surface. (Mann and Hunt 2005)
4
PAGE: 115
Innominate
5
PAGE: 116
Sacrum
6
PAGE: 117
Postcranial Measurements
For a complete list of standard postcranial measurements see Buikstra and
Ubelaker (1994). Buikstra and Ubelaker (1994) have proposed a set of standard
measurements and collection techniques to be employed by all practicing physical and
forensic anthropologists to aid in data collection and comparison between researchers.
Aging of the Postcranium
Few options are available in aging the postcranium including epiphyseal union,
bone measurements in infants, and degenerative change. Bone measurements exist for
fetal material through approximately six years of age; see Johnston 1962 for further
information. Degenerative change in the postcranium is similar to that seen in the
articulation sites in the skull, with osteophytosis and erosion. Epiphyseal union can be
extremely helpful in aging if no dentition is present or if you are working with a
commingled burial. Presence, absence, and fusion of the epiphyses to the shaft of the
bone is a relatively easy observation; see below for further information on aging using
fusion of the epiphyses.
Epiphyseal Union
As a child an individual my have up to 600 separate bones, but by adulthood only 206 are
present. This is due to the fact that there are both primary and secondary centers of
ossification; as an individual ages the secondary centers will fuse to the primary centers.
Below are some age estimates for when epiphyseal union occurs:
Clavicle Sternal epiphysis fused by 25 years of age (Bass 1995)
Femur Head and greater trochanter fused between 14-19 years of age
(Bass 1995)
Fibula Proximal epiphysis fused by 14-22 years of age
Distal epiphysis fused by 11-20 years of age (Bass 1995)
7
PAGE: 118
Humerus Head fused by age 24 years of age
Medial epicondyle fused by age 19 years of age
Distal epiphysis fused between 17-18 years of age (McKern and
Stewart 1957)
Iliac Crest Fused by age 23 (McKern and Stewart 1957)
Innominate Pubis to ischium fused between 7-8 years of age
Fusion of the pubis/ischium/ilium at the acetabulum by at least 17
years of age (Bass 1995)
Ischial Tuberosity Fused by age 24 (McKern and Stewart 1957)
Radius Proximal epiphysis fused between 16-18 years of age
Distal epiphysis fused between 16-18 years of age (Bass 1995)
Ribs Head and articular end fused between 18-24 years of age (Bass
1995)
Sacrum Fuses from inferior to superior between the ages of 18-25 (Bass
1995)
Tibia Proximal epiphysis fused between 14-23 years of age
Distal epiphysis fused between 13-20 years of age (Bass 1995)
Ulna Proximal epiphysis fused by 19 years of age
Distal epiphysis fused between 17-20 years of age (Bass 1995)
Sex Estimation of the Pelvis
The pelvis is an ideal anatomical structure to use in sex estimations of adult
specimens, because of the obvious functional relationship between pelvic shape and
reproduction in the female. Many studies have been done to determine pelvic
characteristics useful in sex estimations. The most easily identified indicators will be
mentioned in this text. The first two are generally the most useful, especially for the
budding osteologist. Clearly, the more experience an osteologist has in making sex
estimations and the greater number and range of pelves examined, the better the
estimations will be.
8
PAGE: 119
1. Sub-pubic angle. The inferior angle that the right and left pubic bones make
when in articulation tend to be wider in females than in males; a wider angle produces a
larger pelvic outlet. Angles closer to 90 degrees suggest male sex, while those 120
degrees and over would suggest a female. The female pelvis is shorter and broad to aid
in the birthing process, since the male pelvis lacks this necessity it is slightly taller and
more narrow.
2. Sciatic notch. A narrow sciatic notch is associated with a restricted pelvic outlet
and is more commonly found in males; the sciatic notch of females tends to be wider.
3. Acetabulum. The acetabulum is larger in males, due to the larger size of the
femoral head in males. As males are generally larger, the femur is larger to transmit the
weight of the body.
4. Obturator foramen. The obturator foramen tends to be larger in males and rather
oval in outline, whereas in females it is smaller and more triangular.
5. Pre-auricular groove. The pre-auricular groove is found in some individuals of
both sexes but it tends to be irregularly pitted in females if the pelvic joint ligaments that
attach there are stressed in childbirth, thus a pitted pre-auricular groove indicates an
estimation of female sex. However, an absence of the groove or a non-pitted form does
not indicate male sex.
6. Sacrum. The sacrum of the male tends to be relatively longer, narrow, and
curved. On the other hand, the female sacrum is broader, short, and straight.
7. Pelvic inlet. The pelvic inlet of the male pelvis, when viewed from above with
the ventral aspect facing you, will be heart shaped in appearance. The female pelvic
inlet, when held in the same aspect, is described as elliptical in appearance.
8. Dorsal pitting. Pits or depressions located on the dorsal aspect of the pubis, near
the pubic symphysis. One or more may be present. The pits have been associated with
pregnancy; number or pits does not necessarily represent number of births but the process
of stretching during the birthing process.
9
PAGE: 120
Sex Estimation of the Non-Pelvic Postcranial Bones
Sex estimation of the non-pelvic postcranial bones can be very difficult, based on
research with accuracy well below 90%. Keep this in mind when employing sex
estimation on these bones. However, if observing several of the bones of a single
individual you will greatly increase your sex estimation accuracy. Those listed below
offer the highest levels of accuracy.
Humerus – A vertical (superior/inferior) measurement of the head, and a transverse
(anterior/posterior) measurement of the head can be used in sexing.
Vertical Transverse
Female 42.67 36.98
Male 48.76 44.66
Femur – A measurement of the greatest diameter of the femoral head may be useful in
determining sex. Keep in mind there may be populational differences.
Female Probable Female
White Femaleª <42.5 42.5-43.5
Black Female* 41.52
Male Probable Male
White Maleª >47.5 46.5-47.5
Black Male* 47.17
ª Stewart 1979:120
*Thieme 1957: Table 1
10
PAGE: 121
Stature Estimation
Stature or height can be measured using any of the long bones, although the femora are
considered the best option for obtaining the highest accuracy rate. A number of factors
appear to influence height including sex, nutrition, geographic location, and genetics. It
is suggested that stature formulae specific to sex and a particular geographic location or
ethnic group be used to ensure accuracy. Below several formulae are shown after Bass
(1995):
Male
Femur White 2.32(femur in cm) + 65.53 +/- 3.94
Black 2.10(femur in cm) + 72.22 +/- 3.91
Mongoloid 2.15(femur in cm) + 72.57 +/- 3.80
Mexican 2.44(femur in cm) + 58.67 +/- 2.99
Tibia White 2.42(tibia in cm) + 81.93 +/- 4.00
Black 2.19(tibia in cm) + 85.36 +/- 3.96
Mongoloid 2.39(tibia in cm) + 81.45 +/- 3.27
Mexican 2.36(tibia in cm) + 80.82 +/- 3.73
Fibula White 2.60(fibula in cm) + 75.50 +/- 3.86
Black 2.34(fibula in cm) + 80.07 +/- 4.02
Mongoloid 2.40(fibula in cm) + 80.56 +/- 3.42
Mexican 2.50(fibula in cm) + 75.44 +/- 3.52
Humerus White 2.89(humerus in cm) + 78.10 +/- 4.57
Black 2.88(humerus in cm) + 75.48 +/- 4.23
Mongoloid 2.68(humerus in cm) + 83.19 +/- 4.16
Mexican 2.92(humerus in cm) + 73.94 +/- 4.24
Radius White 3.79(radius in cm) + 79.42 +/- 4.66
Black 3.32(radius in cm) + 85.43 +/- 4.57
Mongoloid 3.54(radius in cm) + 82.00 +/- 4.60
Mexican 3.55(radius in cm) + 80.71 +/-4.04
11
PAGE: 122
Ulna
White 3.76(ulna in cm) + 75.55 +/-4.72
Black 3.20(ulna in cm) + 82.77 +/-4.74
Mongoloid 3.48(ulna in cm) + 77.45 +/- 4.66
Mexican 3.56(ulna in cm) + 74.56 +/- 4.05
Female
Femur* White 2.47(femur in cm) + 54.10 +/- 3.72
Black 2.28(femur in cm) + 59.76 +/- 3.41
Tibia* White 2.90(tibia in cm) + 61.53 +/- 3.66
Black 2.45(tibia in cm) + 72.65 +/- 3.70
Fibula* White 2.93(fibula in cm) + 59.61 +/- 3.57
Black 2.49(fibula in cm) + 70.90 +/- 3.80
Humerus* White 3.36(humerus in cm) + 57.97 +/- 4.45
Black 3.08(humerus in cm) + 64.67 +/- 4.25
Radius* White 4.74(radius in cm) + 54.93 +/-4.45
Black 3.67(radius in cm) + 71.79 +/-4.59
Ulna* White 4.27(ulna in cm) + 57.76 +/-4.30
Black 3.31(ulna in cm) + 75.38 +/- 4.83
*After Trotter and Gleser (1952:495, 1977:355)
12
PAGE: 123
Post-Cranial Pathology and Trauma
Arthritis/Degenerative Joint Disease - Arthritis can be caused by a number of different
factors both genetic and behavioral. Age of the individual should be noted to make the
best possible diagnosis of type of arthritis observed. Osteophytes or small spicules of
bone may be present at the margins of the joint or within the joint itself. A ridge of
osteophytic change may also be present around the margin of the joint. Erosion is
frequently seen along with osteophytosis; which may be seen as increased porosity or
pitting.
Eburnation – Extreme erosion may occur when the soft tissue within a joint when
cartilage is no longer present. The result is bone on bone contact that creates grooving on
the surface of the joint, overall making a smooth shiny surface. (Aufderheide and
Rodriguez-Martin 1998)
Enthesopathy – Calcified muscular or ligamentous attachments. Most often seen at the
site of the Achilles tendon attachment site, ischial tuberosities,and ilial crests.
(Aufderheide and Rodriguez-Martin 1998)
Fractures – Several types of fractures occur in the postcranial bones including,
greenstick, impacted, simple, compound, comminuted, compressed, spiral, Colles’s, and
parry.
Schmorl’s Nodes - Depression or cavity caused by herniation of the vertebral disc.
Located on either the superior or inferior aspect of the body of a vertebra. The
depressions are oval or linear in shape, with relatively smooth margins. Generally seen
as a sign of advanced age. (Mann and Hunt 2005)
Spina Bifida - Incomplete closure of the neural arches of the sacral vertebrae. Note that
the sacral vertebrae four and five may be open naturally. This condition is both genetic
and environmentally controlled. (Mann and Hunt 2005)
13
PAGE: 124
Dentition
Two parts make up the structure of teeth: a portion within the mouth called the
crown, and a portion within the jaw called the root. The outer surface of the crown seen
in the mouth is a hard white substance called enamel. Directly beneath the enamel is a
softer material called dentine. The central portion of the root contains the pulp or nerve
bundle feeding the tooth, called the pulp chamber. The root itself is made of dentine and
is covered on the outside with a protective substance called dentine.
Observe the crowns of the teeth as seen while in the jaw. Note that the number of
teeth is the same in both the upper and lower jaw. There are four types of teeth present in
the upper and lower jaw: 4 incisors, 2 canines, 4 premolars, and 6 molars for a total of 32
teeth. For comparative purposes in the study of evolutionary change, it is customary to
represent the dentition by the number of teeth in each quadrant of the mouth, as 2.1.2.3.
The incisors are generally chisel-shaped, though some persons including most
American Indians many have lateral ridges making them shovel-shaped (particularly the
upper incisors). The upper incisors are generally wider than the lowers. The canines are
more massive than incisors and when unworn are slightly projecting and pointed. Due to
the narrowness of the lower incisors the lower canine usually occludes slightly forward of
the upper one. The premolar or bicuspid teeth are distinguished by 2 cusps, one lingual
(on the tongue side) and one buccal (on the cheek side). In the molar teeth a distinction
may be made between uppers and lowers. The lower molars are square or rectangular in
shape, with 4-5 cusps. The more anterior of these are generally larger decreasing
posteriorly and have a more complicated cusp pattern. The upper molars are in general
smaller than the lowers, and also decrease in size posteriorly. Three to four cusps are
generally seen in the upper molars; if three are present, two will be on the buccal side and
one on the lingual. In addition, the outline of the upper molar tends to be slightly oblique
rather than rectilinear as in the lowers.
Roots of the teeth are also helpful in determining if they are uppers/lowers and
siding. The roots of the incisors and canines are single, rounded, and tapering, often
curved at the ends. That of the canine is considerably longer and stouter than those of the
14
PAGE: 125
incisors. The roots of the premolars are wider and tend to be grooved in a fashion which
indicates an incipient tendency to be divided into a lingual and buccal root. The roots of
the molar teeth are quite distinct as between the upper and lower. The roots of the lower
molars are double, having an anterior and posterior component, each generally grooved
like the root of a premolar. The third lower molar generally has all parts of the root fused
and somewhat curved. The typical root pattern of the upper molar is two distinct roots on
the buccal side and one on the lingual side. In the second upper molar the three roots are
often less widely spread than in the first, and in the third a single massive fused root is
found. Individual variations make it difficult to identify loose molars exactly.
Many types of variation, often involving accessory cusps are found. Occasionally
deciduous teeth will be encountered. In addition to having smaller crowns, deciduous
teeth are recognized by the thinness and wide divergence of the molar roots.
Teeth of non-industrial peoples are often deeply worn, as more processing of food
occurs within the mouth. The type of wear seen in the dentition and the kind of
pathology present give an indication of the diet and the cultural habits of the individual.
Microscopic study of sections taken through the teeth can provide additional information
about the individual’s health and nutritional status.
Terms
Buccal – The surfaces of the premolars and molars facing toward the cheek.
Cusp – A protuberance on the grinding surface of the canine, pre-molar, or molar.
Distal – The tooth surface farthest from the median line of the dental arch (posterior
aspect).
Incisal edge – The cutting edge of an incisor.
Labial – The surfaces of the incisors and canines facing toward the lips.
Lingual – The tooth surfaces facing toward the tongue.
Mesial – The tooth surface closest to the median line of the dental arch (anterior aspect).
Occlusal surface – The biting or grinding surface of a tooth.
Ridge – A linear elevation on a tooth surface.
15
PAGE: 126
Maxillary Dentition
Top – central incisor. Middle – lateral incisor. Bottom – canine.
16
PAGE: 127
Mandibular Dentition
Top – central incisor. Middle – lateral incisor. Bottom – canine.
17
PAGE: 128
Top – maxillary premolar 1 Top – mandibular premolar 1
Middle – maxillary premolar 2 Middle – mandibular premolar 2
Bottom – maxillary molar 1 Bottom – maxillary molar 1
18
PAGE: 129
Top – Upper Molars 2 & 3 Bottom – Lower Molars 2 & 3
19
PAGE: 130
Dental Variation
Carabelli’s cusp – Additional cusp on the mesio-lingual border of the upper molars.
Seen at the highest frequency among those of European descent. (Hillson 1996)
Enamel extension – Found on teeth with multiple roots, enamel extends down the root.
Most commonly found in upper premolars and molars. (Hillson 1996)
Enamel pearl – Found in association with enamel extensions, except the enamel forms a
small nodule. Most commonly found in upper second and third molars. (Hillson 1996)
Shovel-shaped incisors – The marginal ridges on the lingual aspect of the incisor are
prominent with a deep central fossa. If on the lingual and labial surface this is termed
double shoveling.
Supernumerary – Additional teeth, may be seen at multiple locations within the maxillary
or mandibular alveoli. These teeth may be peg shaped.
For more information on non-metric dental variation see Hillson’s (1996) Dental
Anthropology or Turner et al. (1991) for an introduction to the series of dental casts of
several non-metric traits available through Arizona State University.
Dental Pathology
Abscess – Cavitations in the bone surrounding the tooth root, resulting in the loss of a
tooth and eventually absorption of the bone.
Caries – Destruction of one of the three dental structures (enamel, dentine, or cementum),
caused by bacteria in the mouth. These may be located on the occlusal surface, smooth
surface, within the pulp chamber, at the cemento-enamel junction, or on the root. May be
seen as a brown spot in the early phase, followed by creation of a cavity within the
affected structure.
Dental enamel hypoplasia – Defect in the enamel of the tooth caused due to
developmental issues during secretion of the structure. May cause bands of varying
thickness around the circumference of the tooth; also seen in the form of pitting. Thought
to be associated with a number of physiological stressors including but not limited to
malnutrition, parasites, and weaning.
20
PAGE: 131
References
Aufderheide, A.C. and C. Rodriguez-Martin
1998 The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Human Paleopathology. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
Bass, W.M.
1995 Human Osteology: A Laboratory and Field Manual, 4th Edition. Missouri
Archaeological Society, Inc, Columbia.
Brothwell, D.R.
1965 Digging Up Bones. Cornell University Press, New York.
Buikstra, J.E. and D.H. Ubelaker
1994 Standards for Data Collection from Human Skeletal Remains. Arkansas
Archeological Survey Research Series No. 44. Arkansas Archeological Survey,
Fayetteville.
Hillson, S.
1998 Dental Anthropology. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Johnston, F.E.
1962 Growth of the Long Bones of Infants and Young Children at Indian Knoll.
Human Biology 23:66-81.
Mann and Hunt
2005 Photographic Regional Atlas of Bone Disease: A Guide to Pathologic and
Normal Variation in the Human Skeleton. Charles C. Thomas, Springfield.
McKern, T.W. and T.D. Stewart
1957 Skeletal Age Changes in Young American Males. U.S. Army
Quartermaster Research and Development Command, Technical Report EP-45.
Moorrees, C.F.A., E.A. Fanning, and E.E. Hunt, Jr.
1963 Formation and Resorption of Three Deciduous Teeth in Children.
American Journal of Physical Anthropology 21:205-213.
Stewart, T.D.
1979 Essentials of Forensic Anthropology. Thomas, Springfield.
Thieme, F.P.
1957 Sex in Negro Skeletons. Journal of Forensic Medicine 4:72-81.
Trotter, M. and G.C. Gleser
1952 Estimation of Stature from Long Bones of American Whites and Negroes.
American Journal of Physical Anthropology 10:463-514.
1977 Corrigenda to “Estimation of Stature from Long Limb Bones of American
Whites and Negroes.” American Journal of Physical Anthropology 47:355-356.
Turner, C.G., C.R. Nichol, and G.R. Scott
1991 Scoring Procedures for Key Morphological Traits of the Permanent
Dentition: The Arizona State University Dental Anthropology System. In
Advances in Dental Anthropology, edited by M.A. Kelley and C.S. Larsen, pp.
13-31. Wiley-Liss, Inc, New York.
White, T.D.
2000 Human Osteology. Academic Press, San Diego.
21
